Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
2nd year B.Tech. Materials Engineering
Curriculum Structure
AY 2020-21
2nd year B.Tech. Materials Engineering
Curriculum Structure
AY 2020-21
1
1. Introduction
Addressing continuously evolving demands for materials in the emerging areas such as, energy, aerospace,
defence, healthcare, transport, etc. requires engineers with thorough understanding and knowledge of the
materials. To cater to this requirement, the Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur
envisions to impart high-quality education in the areas of Materials Engineering. The B.Tech. program in
Materials Engineering offers a broad-based academic curriculum designed to attract highly motivated students
interested in the emerging area of Materials and the program is committed to impart high-quality education in
designing, processing and development, characterization and evaluation of advanced materials, and process
metallurgy, so that the students can contribute to the Materials innovation.
The B.Tech. program in Materials Engineering educates and trains students to understand the scientific principles
that govern the relationships among extraction, processing, structure, properties, and performance of materials.
The undergraduate Materials Engineering curriculum encompasses four major streams:
1. Structural materials
2. Functional materials
3. Computational materials engineering
4. Process metallurgy.
The proposed UG curriculum consists of foundational courses, and core and electives from all four major streams.
The foundational courses form the base of the program and enables the student to take program core and program
elective courses from the four major streams. With such a broad curriculum with sufficient subject depth for an
undergraduate program, the B.Tech. program aims to provide students with a solid academic foundation to
address the needs in materials area and encourages them to pursue research in the new and emerging areas. In
the curriculum, an emphasis is given to the emerging areas in materials engineering such as computational
materials engineering, energy materials, and advanced structural materials. Additionally, to enable the students
to pursue their interest in one of the four major streams, the program structure allows students to specialize in
one of the above mentioned streams of Materials Engineering. The students can obtain a Departmental
Specialization after completing additional 20 credits beyond the regular B.Tech. program requirement. This
ensures depth along with sufficient breadth in the curriculum. This curriculum is expected to equip the students
with relevant experimental and computational skillsets relevant to the industry and will enable the graduates to
innovate and address present day materials challenges to meet the future needs of the country.
2. Objective of the program
1. To impart education on the core concepts in Materials Engineering along with providing sufficient breadth
of knowledge in the traditional as well as emerging areas of materials engineering
2. To train students on experimental techniques for studying materials engineering
3. To provide students sufficient analytical and computational skills to address materials engineering needs
4. To introduce an early sense of attitude towards technology development and its lifecycle
5. To inculcate an attitude towards the commitment to engineering ethics, continued learning, and professional
development
6. To enable students to optionally specialise in one of the four areas of focus:
a. Structural materials
b. Functional materials
c. Computational materials engineering
d. Process metallurgy.
3. Expected Graduate Attribute
1. Overall understanding of atomic structure, crystal structure and imperfections in materials
2. Ability to understand the physical and chemical phenomena or process through thermodynamic and kinetic
principles
3. Ability to understand the relation between electronic band structure and electrical, optical and magnetic
properties of materials
2
4. Broad knowledge on processing of materials and fabrication components following various processing and
manufacturing techniques, and basic skills to characterize the microstructure
5. Ability to correlate processing-structure-property-performance of materials and their processing
6. Knowledge about the process of extraction of ferrous and non-ferrous metals from ore
7. Ability to use various simulation tools to design materials and predict material behaviour for a better
understanding of materials
8. Ability to design and execute technical projects
9. Skills to communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers
10. Appreciation and adherence to professional ethics
4. Learning Outcome
1. Ability to apply principles of thermodynamics and kinetics to understand, design and process advanced
materials
2. Ability to use computational and analytical modelling techniques to predict various properties of materials
3. Ability to use materials testing and characterization techniques to validate structure-property-performance
correlation in materials at various length scales
4. Understanding of electronic structure of materials and ability to correlate electronic structure with transport
properties of materials
5. Knowledge of processing parameters for the extraction of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, and knowledge to
comprehend the process cycle to convert raw material to a final product
6. Ability to understand materials processing and process scale up
5. Topic clouds
The major topics from the individual courses are presented here in the form of a topic cloud.
Computational
Materials Engineering
Modelling, Boundary value problem,
Diffusion type problem, Wave
Propagation Problem, Finite Difference,
Computation, Molecular dynamics,
Atomistic simulations, Calculation of
Phase diagram, Thermodynamic
Database, Solidification simulation, Alloy
Design, Modelling, Machine learning,
Feature identification, Informatics, Finite
Element Analysis, Stiffness Matrix,
Galerkin method, Displacement
Structural Materials
Defects in Solids, Plastic Deformation,
Strengthening Mechanisms, Mechanical
Properties, Failure of Materials, Steels,
Processing, Physical Metallurgy,
Microstructure, Properties, Corrosion,
Oxidation, Polymers, Processing, Rheology,
Composites, Fibre-Matrix interface,
laminae and laminates, Ceramics,
Refractories, Glasses, Sintering, Coatings,
Abrasives, 3D printing, Materials for 3D
Printing Process, Additive manufacturing,
Casting techniques, gating design, casting
defects, Fusion welding, Solid state
welding, Microstructure and Properties of
weld zone
Functional Materials
Band structure, Density of States,
Semiconductors, Dopants, metal-oxides,
organics, electronic devices,
semiconductor processing, Battery
Materials, Fuel cells, Hydrogen Storage,
Solar cells, Supercapacitors,
Thermoelectrics, Carbon based materials,
Shape memory alloys, smart materials,
functionally graded materials, self-healing
materials, bio-medical sensing,
electrostrictive and magnetostrictive
materials, smart textiles, Nanomaterials,
Biomaterials, Tissue materials, Implants,
Coatings, Thin films, Deposition,
Processing, functional Properties
Process Metallurgy
Transport processes, Metal-Slag
interaction, Continuous Casting,
Hydrometallurgy, Pyrometallurgy,
Electrometallurgy, Metal extraction,
Refining, Mineral processing,
comminution and screening, separation,
concentration, Chemical Kinetics,
Chemical control, Diffusion control, Rate
controlling step, Ladle metallurgy,
Degassing, Ingot defects, Process
phenomena, Metal-slag interaction,
Energy and Mass Balance, Process control,
Leaching, Phase stability diagram, Metal
recovery processes, Metal utilization,
Electrochemistry, Electrodeposition,
Foundational and
Core topics
Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, Biology,
Signals and systems, Machine learning,
Numerical Methods, Differential Equations,
Computation, Data structure, algorithm,
Thermodynamics, Mechanics, Structure of
Materials, Physical Metallurgy, Polymers,
Corrosion, Materials Selection, Phase
Diagram, Functional Properties, Diffusion,
Mass Transfer, Heat Transfer, Fluid Flow,
Nucleation and Growth, Solidification,
Diffraction, Microscopy, Spectroscopy,
3
6. Unique skillsets targeted
Computational approaches, which will enable
a. Designing of materials and components for engineering applications
b. Prediction of properties of materials
c. Designing of industrial processes
Experimental techniques for
a. Materials testing and characterization
b. Performance evaluation and enhancement
7. Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses
Table 1. Mapping of topic clouds with proposed courses
Area Topics Category (Core/
Elective)
Course
Foundations
of Materials
Engineering
Numerical Methods, Differential
Equations, Computation
Institute Engineering
Core (IE)
Scientific Computation
Reversible and irreversible process, Laws
of thermodynamics, Intensive and
Extensive properties, State variable and
Path variable
Institute Engineering
Core (IE)
Thermodynamics
Supervised learning, Unsupervised
learning, Classification, Artificial neural
network
Institute Engineering
Core (IE)
Introduction to
Machine Learning
Deformation and Strain, Stress, Linear
elasticity, Combined loading, Energy
methods, Buckling
Program Core (PC) Mechanics of Solids
Condensed matter, Functional properties,
Soft matter, Surfaces and Interfaces
Institute Program
linked Science core
(LS)
Introduction to
Condensed Matter
Physics
Data structure, algorithm, searching and
sorting, hashing
Institute Engineering
Core (IE)
Data Structure and
Algorithm
Structure of Materials, Physical
Metallurgy, Polymers, Corrosion,
Materials Selection
Institute Engineering
Core (IE)
Materials Science and
Engineering
Phase equilibria, Thermodynamics of
Solutions, Phase diagram, Reaction
Thermodynamics
Program Core (PC) Materials at
Equilibrium
Nucleation and growth, Phase diagram,
Thermodynamics and kinetics of Phase
transformation, Diffusion, Solidification,
Heat treatment
Program Core (PC) Phase Transformations
Characterization, Diffraction, Microscopy,
Spectroscopy, Thermal Analysis
Program Core (PC) Materials
Characterization
Casting, Solidification, Forming, Joining,
Additive manufacturing
Program Core (PC) Materials processing
and Manufacturing
Structural
Materials
Defects in solids, Plastic Deformation,
Strengthening Mechanisms, Failure of
Materials, Failure prevention
Program Core (PC) Mechanical Behaviour
of Materials
Steels, Processing, Physical Metallurgy,
Microstructure, Strengthening, Properties
Program Elective (PE) Processing-
Microstructure and
Properties of Steels
4
Electrochemistry, Corrosion, Forms of
Corrosion, Corrosion induced failure,
Oxidation, Corrosion Prevention
Program Elective (PE) Degradation of
Materials
Structure of Polymers, Defects,
Polymerization, Processing, Rheology,
Characterization
Program Elective (PE) Polymeric Materials
and Processing
Matrix, Reinforcements, Fibre-Matrix
interface, Processing, laminae and
laminates, Properties, Nanocomposites
Program Elective (PE) Composites
Oxide and non-oxide Ceramics,
Refractories, Glasses, Sintering, Coatings,
Abrasives
Program Elective (PE) Ceramics and Glass
3D printing, Materials for 3D Printing
Process, Additive manufacturing,
Materials processing
Program Elective (PE) 3D Printing: Material
Processing and
Properties
Casting techniques, solidification, Heat
flow, fluid flow, gating design, casting
defects
Program Elective (PE) Casting and
Solidification
Joining, Fusion welding, Solid state
welding, Microstructure of weld zone,
Mechanical Properties of weld zone
Program Elective (PE) Metallurgy of Joining
Creep, Oxidation and Hot Corrosion,
Super Alloys
Program Elective (PE) High Temperature
Materials
Functional
Materials
Band structure, Density of States,
Semiconductors, Dopants, metal-oxides,
organics, carbon nanotubes, electronic
devices
Program Core (PC) Electronic Materials
Battery Materials, Fuel cells, Hydrogen
Storage, Solar cells, Supercapacitors,
Thermoelectrics, Carbon based materials
Program Core (PC) Materials for Energy
Conversion and
Storage
Shape memory alloys, smart polymers,
smart ceramics, functionally graded
materials, self-healing materials, bio-
medical sensing, electrostrictive and
magnetostrictive materials, smart
composites, smart textiles
Program Core (PC) Smart Materials (both
structure property and
electronic property of
materials components)
Semiconductors processing, Synthesis and
processing of 2D Materials
Program Elective (PE) Synthesis and
Processing of
Semiconductors and
2D Materials
Electrodes and Electrolytes,
Electrochemical Cell, Primary and
secondary batteries, Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
Program Elective (PE) Battery Materials
Nanomaterials, Synthesis, Processing,
Characterization, Properties of materials
Program Elective (PE) Nanoscience (from
Department of
Chemistry)
Biomaterials, Biocompatibility,
Biodegradability, Tissue materials,
Implants
Program Elective (PE) Biomaterials
Engineering (Jointly
with BSBE)
Coatings, Thin films, Deposition,
Processing, Properties
Program Elective (PE) Surface Engineering
(PE)
Computatio
nal
Boundary value problem, Partial
Differential Equation, Diffusion type
problem, Finite Difference method,
Program Core (PC) Computational
Modelling of Materials
5
Materials
Engineering
Molecular dynamics, Atomistic
simulations
Thermodynamic parameters, Calculation
of Phase diagram, Thermodynamic
Database, Solidification simulation, Alloy
Design
Program Elective (PE) Computational
Thermodynamics (PE)
Total energy calculations, Electronic and
Phonon Band Structure Calculations
Program Elective (PE) First Principles
Calculations
Conserved and Non-Conserved Order
Parameter, Phase Transitions,
Microstructure Evolution
Program Elective (PE) Phase Field Modelling
Scientific Data, feature identification,
Supervised learning, Materials Design,
Model verification
Program Elective (PE) Machine Learning for
Materials Design (PE)
Finite Element Analysis, Stiffness Matrix,
Galerkin method, Displacement
formulation, Stress analysis
Program Elective (PE) Finite Element
Methods and
Applications (PE)
Process
Metallurgy
Transport processes, Metal-Slag
interaction, Ladle and tundish metallurgy,
Continuous Casting
Program Core (PC) Iron and Steel Making
Hydrometallurgy, Pyrometallurgy,
Electrometallurgy, Metal extraction,
Refining
Program Core (PC) Extraction of
Nonferrous Metals
Mineral processing, comminution and
screening, separation, concentration
Program Elective (PE) Mineral Beneficiation
Chemical Kinetics, Transport processes,
Chemical control, Diffusion control, Rate
controlling step
Program Elective (PE) Kinetics of
Metallurgical
Processes
Degassing, Ladle metallurgy, Ingot
defects, Continuous casting
Program Elective (PE) Secondary and Special
Steelmaking
Process phenomena, Metal-slag
interaction, Energy and Mass Balance,
Process control
Program Elective (PE) Process Metallurgy
Principles
Leaching, Phase stability diagram, Metal
recovery processes, Metal utilization
Program Elective (PE) Hydrometallurgy
Electrochemistry, Electrodeposition,
Electrowinning
Program Elective (PE) Electrometallurgy
6
8. Course categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. programs
Table 2. Course categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. programmes
S.
N.
Course Type Course Category Regular B.Tech. Double B.Tech.
Credit Total Credit Total
1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59
Science (IS) 16 16
Humanities (IH) 12 9
2 Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7 0
3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 50 71 50 71
Programme Electives (PE) 18 18
B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3
4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0
5 Engineering Science (E) Engineering Science Core 0 0 22 22
Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 8 8
Total Graded 150 160
6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15
Engineering (NE) 3 3
Design/Practical Experience (ND) 6 6
Total Graded + Non-Graded 165 175
7
9. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes
Table 3. Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes
Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total Credits
(TC=TH/3)Contact Hours
(CH)
Beyond Contact
Hours (BCH)
Total Hours
(TH)
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1
1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5
#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc.
8
10. List of Programme Compulsory Courses
Table 4. Programme Compulsory Courses for Materials Engineering
Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact
Hours
Credit
1 Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4 4
2 Data Structure and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4
3 Materials at Equilibrium 3-1-0 4 4
4 Electronic Materials 3-0-0 3 3
5 Mechanical Behaviour of Materials 3-0-0 3 3
6 Phase Transformations 3-0-0 3 3
7 Iron and Steel Making 3-0-0 3 3
8 Materials Characterization 3-0-0 3 3
9 Computational Modelling of Materials 3-0-0 3 3
10 Materials Processing and Manufacturing 3-0-0 3 3
11 Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage 3-0-0 3 3
12 Extraction of Nonferrous Metals 3-0-0 3 3
13 Smart Materials 3-0-0 3 3
14 Electronic Materials Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5
15 Physical Metallurgy Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5
16 Materials Characterization Lab 0-0-2 2 1
17 Computational Modelling of Materials Lab 0-0-2 2 1
18 Materials Processing and Manufacturing Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5
19 Energy Materials Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5
Total 50
9
11. Stream-wise Programme Elective Courses
Table 6. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses
Stream SN Courses L-T_P Credit Course
Level
Structural
Materials
1 Processing-Microstructure and Properties of
Steels
3-0-0 3 400
2 Degradation and Failure of Materials 3-0-0 3 400
3 Composites 3-0-0 3 400
4 Polymeric Materials and Processing 3-0-0 3 400
5 Ceramics and Glass 3-0-2 4 400
6 Casting and Solidification 3-0-0 3 600
7 Metallurgy of Joining 3-0-0 3 600
8 High Temperature Materials 3-0-0 3 700
9 Digital Fabrication (Offered by ME) 3-0-0 3 300
10 Smart Manufacturing (Offered by ME) 2-0-2 3 300
11 Additive Manufacturing (Offered by ME) 3-0-0 3 600
12 Computer Aided Design (Offered by ME) 3-0-2 4 400
13 Design of Machine Elements (Offered by
ME)
3-0-2 4 300
Functional
Materials
1 Battery Materials 3-0-0 3 400
2 3D Printing: Material Processing and
Properties
3-0-0 3 400
3 Lithium ion Batteries 2-0-2 3 400
4 Surface Engineering 3-0-0 3 600
5 Synthesis and Processing of Semiconductors
and 2D materials
3-0-0 3 400
6 Functional Ceramics 3-0-0 3 400
7 Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 3-0-0 3 400
8 Nanoscience (Offered by Chemistry) 3-0-0 3 400
9 Biomaterials Engineering 3-0-0 3 400
10 Cell-Material Interaction (BSBE) 3-0-0 3 400
11 Tissue Engineering (BSBE) 3-0-0 3 400
12 Interfacial Engineering in Soft Matter (CHE) 3-0-0 3 400
13 Quantum Mechanics (PHY) 3-0-0 3 600
14 Advanced Condensed Matter Physics (PHY) 3-0-0 3 700
15 Energy Harvesting Technologies (PHY) 3-0-0 3 700
16 Physics of Solar Cells (PHY) 3-0-0 3 700
Computational
Materials
Engineering
1 Computational Thermodynamics 2-0-2 3 400
2 Modelling of Metallurgical Processes 3-0-0 3 700
2 Machine Learning for Materials Design 2-0-2 3 700
4 First-Principles Calculations 3-0-2 4 700
5 Phase field modelling 3-0-0 3 700
6 Industry 4.0: Applications in Metallurgical
and Materials Engineering
2-0-0 2 700
7 Introduction to Internet of Things (Offered
by EE)
1-0-0 1 700
8 Finite Element Methods (Offered by ME) 3-0-0 3 600
9 Artificial Intelligence (CSE) 3-0-0 3 300
10 Deep Learning (CSE) 3-0-3 4.5 400
10
11 Optimization (Offered by MA) 3-0-0 3 400
Process
Metallurgy
1 Mineral Beneficiation 3-0-0 3 400
2 Kinetics of Metallurgical Processes 3-0-0 3 400
3 Principles of Process Metallurgy 3-0-0 3 400
4 Hydrometallurgy 3-0-0 3 400
5 Electrometallurgy 3-0-0 3 400
6 Secondary and Special Steelmaking 3-0-0 3 600
7 Processing of Rare Earth and Radioactive
Materials (CH)
3-0-0 3 400
8 Computational Fluid Dynamics (Offered by
CH)
3-0-2 4 700
Special Topics 1 Special Topics in Materials Engineering 3-0-0 3 400/600
11
12. Specialization to be proposed by the department
The students can obtain a Departmental Specialization after completing additional 20 credits beyond the regular
B.Tech. program credit requirement. From the 20 credits, 8 credits must be taken from core areas of that
specialization and 12 credits should be taken from the electives within that specialization. 4 elective credits (out
of 12) may be taken as elective project, which will allow the student to pursue his/her B.Tech. project in the area
of his/her specialization. Therefore, after proper planning, a student opting for specialization may earn 7 (4
specialization elective project + 3 regular B.Tech. project) credits for B.Tech. project. The specializations will
enable the students to pursue their area of interest and will ensure depth in the curriculum.
Table 7. Specializations List
S. No. Name of Specializations Credit requirement
Core Elective
1 Structural Materials 8 credits 12 credits
2 Functional Materials 8 credits 12 credits
3 Computational Materials Engineering 8 credits 12 credits
4 Process Metallurgy 8 credits 12 credits
Table 8. Specialization concept notes
1
Structural Materials
Structural materials encompass a wide variety of materials whose primary purpose is to support or
transmit load. Structural materials are used in applications such as transportation (aircraft and
automobiles), construction (buildings and roads), or in components used for body protection (helmets
and body armor), energy production (turbine blades), or other smaller structures such as those used in
microelectronics. Structural materials can be metallic, ceramic, polymeric or a composite.
The objective of offering this specialization to encourage students to pursue emerging area of Materials
design, processing, and structure-property correlation for advanced materials for lightweight structures
subjected to severe environments such as high temperature, wear, high stress and strain rates, etc. to
name a few. The advancement in the microstructural characterization has enabled investigation of
materials properties at different length scales which played a key role in solving the sudden material
failure issues in the industry domain. Apart from structural investigation, structural materials stream
provides knowledge of correlating these microstructural features with the mechanical, physical and
electronic properties of the material. This can be achieved by thorough understanding of different
materials processing and manufacturing techniques at lab as well as industry scales.
Therefore, the specialization will provide in-depth education required for designing advanced structural
materials and processing conditions as per the demand of the respective industry to obtain the usable
products in a cost-effective manner. Detailed curriculum for this specialization will be proposed later.
2
Functional Materials
Functional materials represent an ever-growing set of advanced materials, whose properties e.g. shape,
electrical conductivity, mechanical properties, color etc. could be tuned by an external stimulus -
thermal, electrical, mechanical, light etc. These materials are characterized by one or multiple native
properties of their own, e.g. ferroelectricity, thermoelectricity, piezoelectricity, magnetism, energy
storage functions, magneto and electrostrictive materials and could be found in all classes of materials -
ceramics, metals, polymers and organic molecules. Practically all modern-day applications ranging from
computers, memory devices, displays, advanced sensors and MEMS based devices to batteries and
shape memory alloys are a result of the advances in the functional properties of materials.
With the ever-increasing demand for higher performing, more energy efficient and device
miniaturization the functional properties of materials remains the most active areas of research not just
in Materials Science but also cross disciplinary. With the advent of 5G and demand for IoT and AI based
12
technologies and building towards a more sustainable world there is an ever-increasing demand for
materials with hitherto unexplored novel functionalities.
The specialization on “Functional Materials” is being designed to impart the students with different
facets of the functional properties of materials and their real-world applications along with a strong
emphasis on the basics of the underlying phenomena. The functional properties of materials are
continuously evolving in a very dynamic world and hence demands a continuously evolving nature of
the curricula. Owing to the importance of Functional Materials in today’s world we would like to
introduce a specialization on Functional Materials in our B.Tech program. A detailed curriculum will be
proposed later.
3
Computational Materials Engineering
Computational Modeling approaches provide insights into Materials aspects at atomic, micro, macro
length scales and aid in better understanding of Materials and processes. Developments in the
hardware front are making the computing power more affordable and developments in the theoretical
approaches are broadening the capabilities of Modelling approaches. As a result, computational
modeling is playing a key role in Materials design and discovery. The Computational Materials
Engineering (CME) approach combines all available modelling techniques for improving existing
metallurgical processes or properties of a structural material or a functional material. In this respect,
the CME forms a horizontal for different specializations of Materials Engineering.
Traditional science-based modeling techniques such as first-principles calculations, molecular dynamics,
phase field methods, finite element methods, finite difference methods, Calphad methods, etc. have
evolved to give results within acceptable accuracy of the experimental results. Recently, Materials
Scientists started using data analysis-based techniques in Materials design and discovery. The emerging
data-based techniques have potential to accelerate the Material Discovery and improve the Materials
Processing.
The objective of the CME is to combine the traditional science-based techniques with emerging data
based techniques for improving Materials design and discovery. The CME concept is still in infancy and
requires continuous efforts from all the stakeholders involved to bring it to the state-of-the-art stage. In
this direction, we would like to start a B.Tech. program in Materials Engineering with a specialization in
CME. Detailed curriculum for this specialization will be proposed later.
4
Process Metallurgy
Process metallurgy is a specialization concerned with extracting metals from their ores, and the
development, production, and use of metallic materials. Process metallurgy practitioners design
complex metallurgical reactors using principles of physics, thermodynamics, reaction kinetics, and
transport phenomena. Designing of such metallurgical reactors also requires skills in high-temperature
experimentation and computer simulation techniques. In the years to come, extraction of metal will be
extremely difficult due to the decreasing ore grade and strict laws to regulate the environmental impact
of metallurgical emissions. In fact, the future trend in extractive metallurgy is to recover metals, even in
parts-per-million levels, from wastes such as used catalysts and more importantly the ever-increasing
volume of electronic wastes.
A process metallurgy expert acquires multifaceted skills and hence the careers of process metallurgists
may not be restricted to steel, copper, or aluminum plants. In fact, they can also design materials
processing operations such as casting, powder metallurgy, and heat treatment. Semiconductor and
waste processing facilities could also provide job openings. Experts in a computer simulation with a
sound knowledge of transport phenomena have job opportunities spanning across other engineering
branches too. Detailed curriculum for this specialization will be proposed later.
13
13. Curriculum of B.Tech. Materials Engineering
Table 9. Curriculum of B.Tech. in Materials Engineering
Ca
t
Course LTP C
H
N
C
GC Ca
t
Course LTP C
H
NC GC
I Semester II Semester
IE Engineering
Mechanics
2-1-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to
Electrical
Engineering
3-0-2 5 - 4
IS Chemistry 3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to
Computer Science
3-0-2 5 - 4
IS Physics 3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to
Bioengineering
3-0-2 5 - 4
IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1
IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1
IS Mathematics I 3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4
IE Engineering
Visualization
0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering
Realization
0-0-2 2 - 1
NE Engineering Design
I
0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering Design
II
0-0-2 2 1 -
N
H
Communication
Skill I
0-0-2 2 1 - N
H
Communication Skill
II
0-0-2 2 1 -
N
H
Social Connect and
responsibilities I
0-0-1 1 0.
5
- N
H
Social Connect and
responsibilities II
0-0-1 1 0.5 -
N
H
Performing Arts I
/Sports I
0-0-1 1 0.
5
- N
H
Performing Arts
II/Sports II
0-0-1 1 0.5 -
Total 11-2-
12
25 3 16 Total 12-1-
14
27 3 17
III Semester IV Semester
LS Scientific
Computations
3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science &
Engineering
Fractal 1: Physical
Metallurgy
Fractal 2: Polymers
Fractal 3: Corrosion
3 ×
1-0-0
3 - 3
IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC Data Structure and
Algorithm
3-0-2 5 4
PC Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC Materials at
Equilibrium
3-1-0 4 4
IE Introduction to
Machine Learning
3-0-2 5 - 4 PC Materials for Energy
Conversion and
Storage
3-0-0 3 3
LS Condensed Matter
Physics
3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4 - 4
NE Intro. To Profession 0-0-2 2 1 IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3
Total 15-3-
4
22 1 19 Total 15-1-
4
23 - 21
V Semester VI Semester
PC Electronic Materials 3-0-0 3 3 PC Computational
Modelling of
Materials
3-0-0 3 3
PC Mechanical
Behavior of
Materials
3-0-0 3 3 PC Materials Processing
and Manufacturing
3-0-0 3 3
14
PC Phase
Transformations
3-0-0 3 3 PC Extraction of
Nonferrous Metals
3-0-0 3 3
PC Materials
Characterization
3-0-0 3 3 PC Iron and Steel
Making
3-0-0 3 3
PC Electronic Materials
Lab
0-0-3 3 1.5 PC Smart Materials 3-0-0 3 3
PC Physical
Metallurgy Lab
0-0-3 3 1.5 PC Computational
Modelling of
Materials Lab
0-0-2 2 1
PC Energy Materials
Lab
0-0-3 3 1.5 PC Materials Processing
and Manufacturing
Lab
0-0-3 3 1.5
PC Materials
Characterization
Lab
0-0-2 2 1
IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme/Open
Elective
3-0-0 3 3
N
H
Professional Ethics
I
0-1-0 1 - N
H
Professional Ethics II 0-1-0 1 -
Total 15-1-
11
26 1 20.5 Total 18-1-
5
24 1 20.
5
VII Semester VIII Semester
PP B. Tech. Project 0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3
PE
/
OE
Programme/Open
Electives
10-0-
0
10 - 10 PE
/
OE
Programme/Open
Electives
15-0-
0
15 - 15
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3
IS Environmental
Science
2-0-0 2 - 2
Total 15-0-
6
21 - 18 Total 18-0-
0
18 - 18
Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit 9 150
Non-Graded Design Credits 6 -
Grand Total 15 165
15
14. Detailed Course Content
Program Compulsory Courses
Course Title Materials at Equilibrium Number MTL2XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L–T–P [C] 3–1–0 [4]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory (PC)
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. Provide a basis for describing and understanding the stability of various forms of matter.
2. Provide a basis for predicting the properties of an equilibrated system as a function of its content and
characteristics.
Learning Outcomes
3. Establish the conditions for stability of a material and derive its properties.
4. Control the evolution of microstructures with respect to different parameters.
Course Content
Phase equilibria [8 lectures]: Criteria for equilibrium, Maxwell relations, One component system, variation of
free energy with temperature and pressure, equilibrium between condensed phases (solid-liquid, solid-solid),
equilibrium between a vapor phase and a condensed phase
Behavior of gases and liquids [6 lectures]: Ideal and non-ideal gases, activity, fugacity, Partial molar quantities,
Raoult’s law and Henry’s law
Solution thermodynamics [8 lectures]: Gibbs Duhem equation, Gibbs free energy of formation of a solution
(ideal, non-ideal), configurational entropy, Regular solution model, statistical model of solutions
Gibbs Free Energy Composition and Phase Diagrams (binary) [8 lectures]: Gibbs free energy and thermodynamic
activity, standard state, criterion for phase stability, Gibbs free energy composition diagrams, activity-
composition diagrams, Application of regular solution model to phase diagrams
Reactions involving gases [6 lectures]: Reaction equilibrium a gas mixture and the equilibrium constant, effect of
pressure and temperature on the equilibrium constant
Reactions involving a condensed phase and a gas phase [6 lectures]: Standard Gibbs free energy variation with
temperature, Ellingham diagrams, effect of phase transformations
Text Books
Gaskell, D.R. and Laughlin, D.E., (2018), Introduction to Thermodynamics of Materials, 6th Edition CRC Press
References
1. Hillert, M., (2008), Phase Equilibria, Phase Diagrams and Phase Transformations Their Thermodynamic Basis,
Second edition, Cambridge University Press
2. Dehoff, R., (2006), Thermodynamics in Materials Science, 2nd Edition, CRC Press
Online Course Material
Ceder, G., and Anton Van der Ven, A., 3.20 Materials at Equilibrium (SMA 5111). Fall 2003. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-
SA.
16
Title Electronic Materials Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical & Materials Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory (PC)
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Introduce and discuss about different electronic materials, devices and processes.
2. Motivate students to learn more about advanced electronic devices and technologies
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain:
1. Basics of electronic structures of different materials.
2. Understanding the physics of electronic materials and devices.
Contents
Physics of Electronic Materials [12 lectures]: Introduction, electronic structures, basics of quantum mechanics,
energy band theory, Free Electron Bands, Band structure in metals and semiconductors, Development of band
gap, Fermi energy levels, Fermi surface, density of states and charge transport
Semiconductor Materials [8 lectures]: Intrinsic Semiconductors: carrier concentration, mobility, temperature
dependence; Extrinsic semiconductors: Dopant types and materials, Donors and Acceptors, temperature
dependence of number of carriers, Effective mass, Compound Semiconductors
Electronic devices [4 lectures]: p-n junctions, metal-semiconductor contacts, metal-insulator-semiconductor
capacitors, bipolar junction transistors, junction field-effect transistors, MOSFETs and logics.
Other electronic materials [8 lectures]: III-V and II-VI semiconductors, metal oxides, organics, carbon nanotubes
and 2D semiconductors.
Optical properties of materials & Applications [10 lectures]: Optical properties of materials: optical constants, index
of refraction, absorbance, reflectivity, transmissivity, Hagen-Rubens relation; atomistic theory, harmonic
oscillators. Quantum mechanical treatment of the optical properties: absorption, optical spectra of materials.
Applications of the optical properties of materials: Kramers-Kronig analysis, reflection spectra, Lasers, light-
emitting diodes, integrated optoelectronics, waveguides, modulators, switches.
Textbook
1. Streetman,B.G., Banerjee,S. (2001) Solid state electronic devices, Prentice-Hall of India.
2. R.E. Hummel, Electronic Properties of Materials, Springer-Verlag, 3rd edition, 2001.
Reference Books
Sze,S. M., Ng,K.K. (2006) Physics of semiconductor devices, John Wiley & sons.
Online Course Material
Parasuraman Swaminathan, Electronic materials, devices and fabrication, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, IIT Madras,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/106/113106062/
17
Title Mechanical Behavior of Materials Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program
Compulsory (PC)
Pre-requisite -
Objectives
To provide background on the mechanisms of deformation in engineering materials, and on the evolution of
material microstructure when subjected to mechanical stress during materials processing and engineering
applications
Learning Outcomes
1. Ability to design materials with improved mechanical properties and identify failure mechanisms in
materials for engineering applications
2. To measure important mechanical properties and correlate with the microstructure
Contents
Continuum Theory of Deformation [2 lectures]: Stress and strain tensor, Generalized Hooke’s Law, Yield Criteria
Lattice Defects [6 lectures]: Vacancies and interstitials, dislocations: Edge and Screw, stress fields around edge
and screw dislocations, strain energy of dislocations, force on dislocation, dislocation-dislocation interaction
Plastic Deformation [8 lectures]: Slip in a perfect lattice, slip by dislocation movement, Critical Resolved Shear
stress, cross-slip and climb, deformation of single crystals, dislocations in different crystal structures, twinning
Strengthening Mechanisms [8 lectures]: Grain boundary strengthening, strain hardening, solid-solution
hardening, age-hardening, martensite strengthening
Fracture and Toughening Mechanisms [6 lectures]: theoretical fracture strength and Griffith’s Law, modes of fracture,
fracture toughness, brittle and ductile fracture, toughening mechanisms in metals, ceramics, and polymers
Fatigue and Creep [6 lectures]: Introduction to fatigue, stress and strain-life approach, cyclic stress-strain curve,
fatigue crack propagation, high temperature deformation, fatigue-creep interaction
Deformation of Polymers [6 lectures]: Elastic deformation in semi crystalline polymers, nonlinear elastic
deformation, shear banding and crazing, stress-strain curves
Text Books
1. Courtney, T. H., (2005), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, 2nd Edition, Waveland Press Inc.
2. Dieter, G.E., (1989), Mechanical Metallurgy, SI Metric Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company.
3. Shetty, M. N., (2013), Dislocations and Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Prentice Hall India Learning Private
Limited
Reference Books
1. Hertzberg, R.W., (2013), Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering Materials, 5th Edition, Wiley
2. McClintock,F.A., and Argon,A.S., (1966), Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Addison-Wesley.
Online Course Material
Van Vilet, K., 3.22 Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Spring 2008. Massachusetts Institute of Technology:
MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-and-engineering/3-22-mechanical-
behavior-of-materials-spring-2008/
18
Title Phase Transformations Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program
Compulsory
(PC)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The Instructor will:
Explain the importance of phase transformations in solid and liquid state and their applications through
experimentation
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand the microstructure evolution during the phase transformation
2. Understand the variation of properties with the microstructure evolution towards developing heat
treatment-microstructure-property relationship
Contents
Thermodynamics and Kinetics [6 Lectures]: free energy, order of transformation, driving force, homogeneous and
heterogeneous nucleation, growth kinetics, coarsening, precipitation
Phase Transformation during Solidification [4 Lectures]: Eutectic and Peritectic Transformation
Heat-Treatment of Ferrous and Nonferrous Metals [6 Lectures]: Annealing, Normalizing, Hardening and
Tempering, Precipitation Hardening
Interfaces [4 Lectures]: atomic mechanisms of diffusion, activation energy, interfacial free energy, types of
interface (coherent, semi-coherent and incoherent interfaces), interface migration
Diffusional Phase Transformations in Solids [14 Lectures]: austenite, transformation of austenite, TTT diagram,
eutectoid transformation, pearlite and bainite transformation, order-disorder transformation, precipitation
hardening, spinodal decomposition and massive transformation
Diffusionless Phase Transformations in Solids [8 Lectures]: Martensite transformation: characteristics and nature,
morphology, crystallography, theory of nucleation and growth, and pre-martensite phenomena, martensitic
transformation in steel. Martensite in non-Ferrous systems-thermoelastic martensite and shape memory effect.
Textbooks
1. Raghavan,V., (1987), Solid State Phase Transformations, 1st edition, Prentice Hall India,.
2. Porter,D.A., Easterling,K.E., and Sherif,M.Y., (2009), Phase Transformation in Metals and Alloys, 3rd edition,
CRC Press,
3. Abbaschian,R., Abbaschian,L., and Reed-Hill,R.E., (2009), Physical Metallurgy Principles, 4th edition,
Cengate Learning,
4. Rajan,T.V., Sharma,C.P., and Sharma,A., (2011), Heat Treatment: Principles and Techniques, 2nd edition,
Prentice Hall India
Reference Books
1. Khachaturyan,A.G., Theory of Structural Transformations in Solids, 1st edition, Dover publications, 2008.
2. Avner, S.H., Introduction to Physical Metallurgy, 2nd edition, McGraw Hill Education, 2017
Online Course Material
Gururajan,M.P., Phase Transformations and Heat Treatment, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113101003/
19
Title Iron and Steel Making Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory
(PC)
Pre-requisite
Objectives
Explain principles of thermodynamics and process metallurgy involved in traditional and advanced iron and
steel making processes
Learning Outcomes
1. Understand the basics of process metallurgy involved in iron and steel making processes
2. Be cognizant of advanced iron making and steel making processes in industries
Contents
Introduction to Iron Making and steelmaking [10 lectures]: concept of integrated steel plant, different types of
ironmaking processes, agglomeration techniques, basic thermodynamics, kinetics and transport phenomena
in iron and steelmaking processes
Transport Processes in Blast Furnace [8 lectures]: temperature, burden distribution, and aerodynamics of blast
furnace, physical and chemical; processes in upper and lower zones of blast furnace
Alternative Iron Making Processes [8 lectures]: direct reduction process-DRI, HBI, smelting reduction process-
Corex, Romelt, HiSmelt, Finex etc.
Modern Steelmaking Processes [10 lectures]: basic oxygen furnace steelmaking, Electric Arc Furnace, and induction
furnace steelmaking
Secondary Steelmaking Processes [6 lectures]: deoxidation, ladle and tundish Metallurgy, continuous casting,
casting defects
Text Books
1. Ghosh,A., and Chatterji,A., (2008), Ironmaking and Steelmaking: Theory and Practice, Prentice-Hall (India)
2. Turkdogan,E.T., (1997), A Text Book of Steelmaking, Academic Press, London Shetty, M. N., (2013),
Dislocations and Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Prentice Hall India Learning Private Limited
3. Chatterjee,A., (1994), Beyond the Blast Furnace, CRC Press
Self-Learning Materials
Ghosh,A., (2000), Secondary Steelmaking, CRC Press, Boca Raton
Online Course Material
1. Muzumdar,D., and Koria,S.C., Steelmaking, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Material Science and
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104013/
2. Gupta,G.S., Iron Making, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Materials Engineering, Indian Institute
of Science Bangalore, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113108079/
20
Title Materials Characterization Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. Program Type Program Compulsory
(PC)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The Instructor will:
Explain the principle of the instruments and methods for characterizing different materials and their properties
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Know the basic working principles of various instruments and use the same while performing experiments
2. Choose the characterization methods based on the requirement and performance
Contents
Light Optical Microscopy [6 Lectures]: polarization microscopy, phase contrast microscopy, DIC Microscopy and
confocal microscopy
Diffraction Techniques [6 Lectures]: X-Ray Diffraction, Electron Diffraction
Electron Microscopies [8 Lectures]: Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) & transmission electron microscopy
(TEM)
Scanning Probe Microscopy [6 Lectures]: scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) & atomic force microscopy
(AFM)
Spectroscopic Characterization [6 Lectures]: UV-VIS-NIR, optical emission, XRF, FTIR, and Raman spectroscopy
Surface Characterization [6 Lectures]: Auger electron spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
Thermal Analysis [4 Lectures]: thermal mechanical analysis (TMA), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC),
thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA), differential thermal analysis (DTA)
Textbook
1. Zhang,S., Li,L. and Kumar,A., (2008), Materials Characterization Techniques, , CRC Press
2. Cullity, B.D., Stock, S.R., (2014), Elements of X-Ray Diffraction, 3rd Edition, Pearson Education Limited
Reference Books
1. Evans,C., Brundle.R. and Wilson, (1992), Encyclopaedia of Materials Characterization: Surfaces, Interfaces, Thin
Films (Materials Characterization Series), Butterworth-Heinemann,
2. Kaufmann,E.N., (2012), Characterization of Materials, 3 Volume Set, 2nd Edition, Wiley
3. Egerton,R., (2016), Physical Principles of Electron Microscopy: An Introduction to TEM, SEM and AEM, 2nd ed.
Springer
4. Hwang,J-Y, Monteiro,S.N., Bai,C., Carpenter,J.S., Cai,M., Firrao,D., Kim,B-G., (2012), Characterization
of Minerals, Metals and Materials, Wiley
Online Course Materials
1. Shankaran,S., Materials Characterization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Metallurgical &
Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106034/
2. Alagarsamy,P., Characterization of Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, Indian
Institute of Technology, Guwahati, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103030/
3. Biswas,K. and Gurao,N.P., NPTEL Course Material, Advanced Characterization Techniques, Department of
Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur,
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104004/
4. Barbastathis,G., Smith,H. and Berggren,K., Submicrometer and Nanometer Technology. Spring 2006.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative
Commons BY-NC-SA
21
Course Title Computational Modelling of Materials Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L–T–P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory
(PC)
Pre-requisite -
Objectives
1. Introduce modelling in the context of Materials Engineering
2. Introduce the theory behind the first-principles calculations
3. Create awareness of the opportunities and limitations of Molecular dynamics simulations
Learning Outcomes
1. Ability to formulate model and solve initial value and boundary value problems
2. Understand the working principles of the first-principles calculations and molecular dynamics
3. Simulate materials using the first-principles calculations and molecular dynamics
Course Content
Introduction to Modelling in Materials [14 lectures]: Types of linear PDEs, Modelling Diffusion type problems-
Derivation of Heat Equation, Boundary Conditions, Separation of Variables, Infinite diffusion problem by
integral transform, 1-D wave equation-Boundary conditions, Steady state problems, Numerical solutions-
Finite Difference Method
Molecular Dynamics [14 lectures]: Molecular dynamics: Applications, basic concepts, potential energy
functions, integration algorithms, temperature control, boundary conditions, neighbour lists, initialization,
equilibrium, geometry optimization, static properties, dynamical properties, analysis of results, visualisation
First Principle Calculations-2 [14 lectures]: Notation & Mathematics: Dirac notation, Fourier transformation,
Function and functional, Quantum mechanics: Schrodinger equation, Born-Oppenheimer approximation,
Mean-field methods, Kohn-Sham method: Density functional theory, Hohenberg-Kohn theorems, Kohn-
Sham method, Exchange correlation functional, Structure relaxation, Smearing methods, Electronic band
structure, Fermi-Dirac distribution
Text Books
1. Rappaz, M., Bellet, M., Deville, M., Numerical Modeling in Materials Science and Engineering, Springer Science
& Business Media, 2010.
2. Frenkel, D., Smit, B., Understanding Molecular Simulation: From Algorithms to Applications, 2nd Edition,
Elsevier 2001.
3. Lee, J. G., Computational Materials Science: An Introduction, 2nd edition, CRC Press, 2016.
References
1. Sholl, D. S., and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, 1st Edition, Wiley, 2009.
2. Parr, R.G., and Yang, W., Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules, 1st Edition, Oxford Science
Publications, 1994.
3. Lesar, R., Introduction to Compuational Materials Science
Online Course Material
Ceder, G. and Marzari, N., 3.320 Atomistic Computer Modeling of Materials (SMA 5107). Spring 2005.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative
Commons BY-NC-SA
22
Title Materials Processing and Manufacturing Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory
(PC)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The Instructor will:
Introduce the various industrially relevant materials processing and manufacturing techniques
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand the microstructure evolution during the phase transformation
2. Understand the variation of properties with the microstructure evolution towards developing heat
treatment-microstructure-property relationship
Contents
Bulk Processing of Materials [14 lectures]: Thermodynamics of solidification, pure metal solidification, Alloy
Solidification: Constitutional undercooling, dendritic growth. Structure of casting and ingots, Types of casting,
Heat transfer, Joining- Welding and its types, Brazing and Soldering, Microstructural mechanisms associated
with metals joining operations, Powder Metallurgy, Additive manufacturing of metals.
Bulk Metal Forming Techniques [14 lectures]: Rolling- Analysis of rolling, hot and cold rolling, microstructural
changes during rolling, rolling defects, rolling mill; Forging- open and closed die forging; lubricated and non-
lubricated extrusion.; wire-drawing- die design and materials, optimal die angle, sheet metal forming-
bending, stretching and deep drawing, anisotropy parameter, forming limit diagram, microstructural changes
Processing of Ceramics and Polymers [14 lectures]: Ceramic processing: Powder preparations, solid state reactions,
Sintering, Colloidal processing, Co-precipitation method, Sol-Gel process, Porous ceramics and ceramic fibres.
Polymer processing: Mixing and compounding, extrusion process, moulding processes, thermoforming, roller
and blade coating, textile/fiber spinning technology, Additive manufacturing of polymers and ceramics.
Textbooks
1. Flemings,M.C., (1974), Solidification Processing, Mcgraw-Hill Book Company
2. Dieter,G.E., (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company
3. El-Kareh, B., Fundamentals of semiconductor processing technology, 3rd Edition, 1995, Springer US
Reference Books
1. Chalmers,B., (1967), Principles of Solidification, Wiley
2. Stefanescu,D.M., (2015), Science and Engineering of Casting Solidification, 3rd edition, Springer
3. Hosford, W.F., Caddell, R.M., (2014), Metal Forming: Mechanics and Metallurgy, 4th Edition, Cambridge
University Press
Online Course Material
1. Shekhar, S., Fundamentals of Materials Processing (Part–1), NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104073/
2. Shekhar, S., Fundamentals of Materials Processing (Part–2), NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104075/
23
Title Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage Number MTL4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The course outlines in a nutshell:
1. Different modes of energy conversion and storage
2. Development of materials with time and different applications, scale, energy and power density
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain knowledge on:
1. Structure processing property performance relationship of the energy materials developed over time.
2. Different modes of energy conversion and storage with respect to scale, cost, energy and power density
Contents
Introduction [2 lectures]: Classification, Overview of Electrical (static), Electrochemical, Thermal, Mechanical,
Photo-electrochemical (includes biological) energy storage.
Electrical (static) [4 lectures]: Capacitor, Leyden Jar, corona discharge, dielectrics.
Electrochemical conversion and storage [14 lectures]: Introduction to Electrolytic capacitor, Electrochemical cell
(Battery), Supercapacitor, primary and secondary batteries, Li-ion battery, fuel cells.
Photo-electrochemical conversion [4 lectures]: Photo-electric effect, artificial photo synthesis, semiconductor based
solar cells, dye-synthesized solar cells.
Thermal conversion and storage [8 lectures]: Solar thermal energy conversion, sterling engines, Molten salt
technology, eutectic mixtures, Phase-change materials, thermoelectric materials.
Mechanical storage [6 lectures]: Pumped storage, gravity batteries, Compressing air storage, flywheels.
Carbon Materials for Energy conversion and storage [4 lectures]: Hybridization and carbon allotropes overview,
Synthesis and characterization of carbon allotropes, Functionalization of carbon materials, Carbon
nanomaterials for energy conversion and storage.
Textbook
Cheong K.Y., Impellizzeri,G and Fraga,M.A., (2018), Emerging Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage, 1st
Edition, Elsevier
Reference Book
Rosen, M.A., (2012) Energy Storage, Nova
Online Course Materials
1. Prof. Bazant M., MITopencourseware: Electrochemical Energy Systems, MIT Course Number 10.626 /
10.426,
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemical-engineering/10-626-electrochemical-energy-systems-spring-2014/
2. Prof. Pal K., Selection Of Nanomaterials For Energy Harvesting And Storage Application, NPTEL Course
Material, Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/107/112107283/
24
Title Extraction of Nonferrous Metals Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory
(PC)
Pre-requisite -
Objectives
Explain principles of thermodynamics and process metallurgy involved in traditional and advanced
processes of nonferrous metal extraction
Learning Outcomes
Understand the basics of extractive metallurgy involved in nonferrous metal extraction processes
Contents
Early developments in metal extraction [2 lectures]: Nonferrous metals in Indian history, uses of nonferrous metals,
Sources of nonferrous metals
Principles of metals extraction [4 lectures]: Thermodynamic principles, homogeneous and heterogeneous
reactions, Ellingham diagram, kinetic principles, principles of electro-chemistry
General methods of extraction [10 lectures]: Pyrometallurgy – calcination, roasting and smelting, Hydrometallurgy
– leaching, solvent extraction, ion exchange, precipitation, and electrometallurgy – electrolysis and electro-
refining)
General methods of refining [4 lectures]: Basic approaches, preparation of pure compounds, purification of crude
metal produced in bulk
Extraction of metals from oxide sources [6 lectures]: Basic approaches and special features of specific extraction
processes, extraction of metals such as magnesium, aluminum, tin and ferro-alloying elements, production of
ferro alloys.
Extraction of metals from Sulphide Ores [6 lectures]: Pyro-metallurgy and hydrometallurgy of sulphides,
production of metals such as copper, lead, zinc, nickel etc.
Extraction of metals from Halides [6 lectures]: Extraction of metals from halides: Production of halides and refining
methods, Methods of extraction of metals such as titanium, rare earths, uranium, thorium, plutonium,
beryllium, zirconium etc.
Production of precious metals [2 lectures]: Methods applied for gold, silver and Pt group of metals
Waste Utilization [2 lectures]: Secondary metals and utilization of wastes, Energy and environmental issues in
nonferrous metals extraction
Text Books
1. Ray, H.S., Sridhar, R. and Abraham, K.P. Extraction of nonferrous metals, Affiliated East West Press Pvt
Ltd., New Delhi (2007)
2. Dennis, W.H., Extractive Metallurgy, Philosophical Library, New York (1965)
Self-Learning Materials
Ray, H.S., and Ghosh, A., Principles of extractive metallurgy, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, 1991
Online Course Material
Ray, H.S., Non-ferrous Extractive Metallurgy, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Materials and
Metallurgical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/105/113105021/
25
Title Smart Materials Number MTL4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. Materials Engineering Type Compulsory
Prerequisite Nil
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Introduce the family of smart materials along with their mechanisms, design and applications
2. Provide appreciation to utilize smart materials in context of smart engineering structure
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain:
1. Basic understanding of intelligent materials and their utilization
2. Methodology of newer materials development towards specific applications
Contents
Introduction [6 lectures]: Basic definitions, classification of smart materials, modification of material structures,
stimuli for reversible shape and structural transformation
Shape Memory Alloys (SMA) [8 Lectures]: Shape memory and superelasticity effects, Microstructural
mechanisms, Range of SMA, phases and crystal structure, Processing (training), bonding and joining, High
temperature SMA, Magnetic SMA, Giant magnetostrictive material, Thin films, Applications
Polymeric Smart Materials [14 lectures]: Functionally graded polymer blend, Smart performances; Electro-
conductive polymers, Electro-chromatic Sol-Gel, Smart drug delivery systems, Bio-medical sensing, Self-
healing materials, Nanoparticles, Porous particles, Smart widows, Flip-chip under-fill, Magneto-rheological
fluids, Thermo-responsive polymers, Information materials and adaptive architecture, Application in forensic
science
Ceramic Smart Materials [6 lectures]: Piezoelectric and electrostrictive ceramics, Non-contact ultrasonic material
testing and analysis, Hydrothermal synthesis of smart ceramics, Intelligent control of phase assemblage,
crystal size and morphology
Smart Composites [4 lectures]: Design and characterization of magnetostrictive composites, Carbon
nanomaterials based yarns and nanocomposites, Structural health monitoring and self-healing, Active fiber
composites
Smart Textiles [2 lectures]: Smart textile for medicine and health care, Textile based electronic components
Integration of Smart Materials and Smart Structures [2 lectures]: Varying smart materials and multifunctions,
Biotelemetry study, Structure design concepts, Applications
Laboratory Experiments
NA
Textbook
1. Schwartz M. (Ed.) (2009) Smart Materials, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group
2. Hou X. (Ed.) (2016), Design, Fabrication, Properties and Applications of Smart and Advanced Materials,
CRC Press
3. Elhajjar et al. (Eds.) (2014) Smart Composites Mechanics and Design, LLC, Taylor and Francis Group
Reference Books
Guardia, M., Esteve-Turrillas F.A. (Eds.) (2019) Handbook of Smart Materials in Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 1,
Wiley
Online Course Material
1. Bhattacharya B, Smart Materials and Intelligent System Design (Video); IIT Kanpur, 2018,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104251/#
2. Bhat K.N. et al., Micro and Smart Systems, IISc Bangalore. NPTEL 2012,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112108092/
26
Title Electronic Materials Lab Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical & Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory (PC)
Prerequisite
Objectives
The objective of the course is to introduce the students to different types of electrical and electronic property
characterization and instrumentation.
Learning Outcomes
Upon successful completion of the course students will get a first-hand knowledge of device fabrication and
then measure and analyse the functional properties of the materials.
Laboratory Experiments
1. Impedance Spectroscopy: Impedance Measurements as a function of temperature
2. Measurement of Dielectric and Ferroelectric properties of Materials
3. Piezoelectric Effect: Measurement of piezoelectric constants
4. Preparation of structures using photolithography
5. Deposition of metallic electrodes using thermal evaporation method
6. Semiconducting thin films using solution/printing processes
7. Measuring electrical resistance and sheet resistance of semiconductors
8. Effect of temperature on the electrical conductivity of semiconductors
9. Electrical characterization of p-n junction diodes
10. Magnetic Measurements: M-H hysteresis, M vs T measurement
11. Optical Property measurements
Textbook
Specific Laboratory protocols and handouts will be made for different experiments.
27
Title Physical Metallurgy Lab Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–3 [1.5]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory (PC)
Pre-requisite -
Objectives
To introduce the students to different types of phase transformations in solid and liquid state experiments
and to provide hands-on training on various mechanical testing equipment to measure mechanical properties
of materials.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to
1. Apply the knowledge of phase transformation to understand microstructure and mechanical property
evolution in materials
2. Measure mechanical properties of materials
Laboratory Experiments
1. Uniaxial monotonic stress-strain response of metals, ceramics, and polymers
2. Hardness via spherical and Vickers indentation and correlation with yield strength
3. Effects of annealing, normalizing, and hardening heat treatments on microstructure and mechanical
properties of steels
4. The effects of grain size on yield strength
5. Effects of cold working and subsequent annealing on microstructure and mechanical properties
6. Hardenability of steels using Jominy end quench test
7. Age hardening study of a range of aerospace materials (Al-alloys, Ti-alloys, superalloys)
8. Activation energy and Stored energy calculation for phase transformation
9. Measurement of quasi-static and indentation fracture toughness
10. Measurement of impact fracture toughness using Charpy/Izod impact test
11. Fracture surface interpretation using SEM
12. Creep of a 60%Sn-40%Pb Solder wire at room temperature
Textbook
Specific Laboratory protocols and handouts will be made for different experiments.
28
Title Materials Characterization Lab Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-2 [1]
Offered for B.Tech. Program Type Program Compulsory (PC)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
Hands on training on instruments and methods for characterizing different materials and their properties
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability handle various material characterization tools.
Laboratory Experiments
1. Quantitative metallogrphic analysis of metals, ceramics, polymers and composites
2. Electropolishing of aluminium alloys
3. Grain refinement studies using polarization microscope
4. Crystal structure determination using X-ray Diffraction analysis
5. Crystallite size measurement using X-ray Diffraction analysis
6. Indexing of selected area diffraction pattern
7. Specific heat and enthalpy calculation using DSC analysis
8. Phase transformation during solidification using thermal analysis
9. FTIR analysis of ceramic materials
10. UV-Visible spectroscopy analysis of thin films
Textbook
Specific Laboratory protocols and handouts will be made for different experiments.
29
Course Title Computational Modeling of Materials Lab Number MT3LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L–T–P [C] 0–0–2 [1]
Offered for B.Tech. 3rd Year Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objectives
Hands-on training in running simulations.
Learning Outcomes
Simulate materials using numerical methods, molecular dynamics, first-principles calculations
Course Content
Numerical modelling Exercises
1. One-Dimensional Transient Heat Conduction: Numerical implementation
2. Diffusion equation: finite difference method
3. 1D-wave equation
Molecular dynamics Exercises
1. Calculate the energy in different crystal lattice structures
2. Determination of coefficient of thermal expansion
3. Application of tensile load and visualize the results
4. Determination of bulk modulus
First-principles calculations Exercises
1. Preparation of input files and visualisation of structures
2. Optimisation of simulation parameters.
3. Determination of equilibrium lattice parameter
4. Structure optimisation using a variable-cell method
Text Books
1. Rappaz, M., Bellet, M., Deville, M., Numerical Modeling in Materials Science and Engineering, Springer Science
& Business Media, 2010.
2. Frenkel, D., Smit, B., Understanding Molecular Simulation: From Algorithms to Applications, 2nd Edition,
Elsevier 2001.
3. Lee, J. G., Computational Materials Science: An Introduction, 2nd edition, CRC Press, 2016.
References
1. Sholl, D. S., and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, 1st Edition, Wiley, 2009.
2. Parr, R.G., and Yang, W., Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules, 1st Edition, Oxford Science
Publications, 1994.
Online Course Material
Ceder, G. and Marzari, N., 3.320 Atomistic Computer Modeling of Materials (SMA 5107). Spring 2005.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative
Commons BY-NC-SA
30
Title Materials Processing and Manufacturing Lab Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory (PC)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
Hands on training on various industrially relevant materials processing and manufacturing techniques
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to handle various material processing and manufacturing
equipment.
Laboratory Experiments
1. Injection molding of polymers
2. Blade coating of polymers
3. Sol-gel processing of ceramics
4. Sintering of ceramics
5. Melting and Casting of Aluminum Alloys
6. Welding of steels
7. Welding of Aluminum alloys
8. Additive manufacturing of polymers
9. Additive manufacturing of ceramics
Textbook
Specific Laboratory protocols and handouts will be made for different experiments.
31
Title Energy Materials Lab Number MTL4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The course outlines in a nutshell:
1. Different modes of energy conversion and storage
2. Development of materials with time and different applications, scale, energy and power density
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain knowledge on:
1. Structure processing property performance relationship of the energy materials developed over time.
2. Different modes of energy conversion and storage with respect to scale, cost, energy and power density
Laboratory Experiments
1. Demonstration of static electricity storage with electrostatic generator, Corona effect, Energy storage in
Leyden jar. Fabrication of a capacitor
2. Charging and discharging of a capacitor, Measuring the capacitance of a Capacitor, Role of capacitor in
voltage stabilizing/regulating, filtering
3. Fabrication and operation of a Lead-acid battery, Charge discharge voltammetry/EIS characteristics of
Lead-acid battery
4. Fabrication and operation of a Lithium-ion battery, half-cell and full cell configuration, Charge
discharge/voltammetry/EIS characteristics of Lithium-ion battery
5. Degradation test for lithium ion batteries, Use of different cathodes, Cell fabrication and dismantling,
observation of structural changes, effect of temperature
6. Battery aging and self-discharge of lead-acid and lithium ion battery, battery for electric vehicles
7. Conversion of carbon dioxide into propane through artificial photosynthesis
8. Experimental Evaluation of a Paraffin as Phase Change Material for Thermal Energy Storage
9. Modelling and validation of a flywheel energy storage, modelling of gravity assisted storage systems (can
be taken before)
10. Synthesis of different forms of carbon nanomaterials for capacitor, artificial photosynthesis devices and
electrodes for batteries, observation of different morphologies and structural reversibility (demonstration
experiment, make it simple)
Textbook
Specific Laboratory protocols and handouts will be made for different experiments.
32
15. Program Elective Courses
Title Processing-Microstructure and Properties of Steels Number MT4XXX
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective
(PE)
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
Describe the processing-structure-property relationship of steels used in engineering applications
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
Design the processing routes to obtain steel microstructures that will provide customizable properties to the
component for specific engineering applications
Contents
Processing of Steels [6 lectures]: Melting and casting, Steel refining by ESR and VIM, and VAR, heat treatment of
steels, thermo-mechanical processing of steels, sheet metal forming and welding of steels
Physical Metallurgy of Steels [12 lectures]: Effects of alloying elements on Fe-C phase diagram, structure and
transformation kinetics of pearlite, interphase precipitation, divorced pearlite, Martensite-crystal structure,
transformation kinetics, morphology, Bainite-Bainite start temperature, upper and lower bainite, bainitic
microstructure, Widmanstattaen ferrite, acicular and equiaxed ferrite
Low Carbon Steels [8 lectures]: types of low carbon steels, hot-rolled ferrite-pearlite steels, processing by hot
rolling, cold-rolling and annealing, interstitial free steel, HSLA steel, Dual-phase (DP) steel, TRIP steels,
applications
Medium and High Carbon Steels [8 lectures]: microalloyed steel-microstructure and mechanical properties, rail
steels, patenting-pearlite formation in high strength steel wire, drawing of pearlitic high carbon steel wires,
hardening and tempering process, temper embrittlement, tool steels, applications
Stainless Steels [4 lectures]: alloy design for stainless steels, austenitic, ferritic and martensitic stainless steels,
precipitation hardened and duplex stainless steels, applications
Surface Hardened Steels [4 lectures]: carburizing, Nitriding, carbo-nitriding, induction hardening, flame
hardening
Textbooks
Krauss,G., (2005), Steels: Processing, Structure, and Performance, 2nd Edition, ASM International
Reference Books
Bhadeshia,H.K.D.H, Honycombe,R.W.K, (2017), Steels: Microstructures and Properties, 4th Edition, Butterworth-
Heinemann
33
Title Degradation and Failure of Materials Number MTL4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The instructor will explain
1. About materials degradation due to different types of corrosion, their mechanisms and inhibition.
2. Failures resulting due to corrosion and corrosion prevention
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain:
1. Basic understanding on the possibility, outcome and rate of corrosion.
2. Knowledge on selection of corrosion resistant materials even before designing
Contents
Introduction [4 lectures]: Definitions, Different forms of Environmental degradation, Cost of Corrosion,
Electrochemical Nature, Aims
Thermodynamics of Corrosion [10 lectures]: Process at Interface, Free Energy and Electrochemical Potential, EMF
Series, Nernst Relationship, Important Reactions, Cell Potential, Reference Electrodes, Pourbaix diagram and
its important in metal corrosion, Calculation of Pourbaix diagram for Al, Cu, Ni and Fe.
Kinetics of Corrosion [10 lectures]: Current Density and Corrosion Rate, Corrosion Rate Expressions, Exchange
Current Density, Polarization, Activation, Concentration and Resistance polarization, Mixed potential theory.
Types of Corrosion and Failures [8 lectures]: Major forms of corrosion and failures originating due to corrosion,
Hydrogen embrittlement, Corrosion fatigue
Corrosion testing and protection [6 lectures]: Corrosion experiments - Potentiodynamic test - Galvanostatic test -
Linear Polarization-Immersion test - Salt fog test. Electrochemical ways: Sacrificial anode, Impressed current
cathodic protection, Anodic protection, Environmental control over corrosion - Coating – Inhibitor.
Oxidation of Metals and Alloys [4 lectures]: Pilling Bedworth Ratio - Thermodynamics of oxidation: Ellingham
diagram, of oxidation - Effect of doping on the oxidation behaviour.
Laboratory Experiments
NA
Textbook
Fontana M. G. (1987) Corrosion Engineering, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company
Reference Books
Zaki A. (2006) Principles of Corrosion Engineering and Corrosion Control, Elsevier Science & Technology
Books.
Online Course Material
Mondal K., Corrosion - Part I and II, NPTEL Course Material, Metallurgy & Material Science, Indian Institute
of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104082/,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104089/
34
Title Composites Number MT3XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Pre-requisite -
Objectives
The main objective of this course is
1. To introduce structure and processing of composites
2. To and uses of composites
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to
1. Classification and application of different composite materials and their processing techniques
2. Acquire understanding about the structure property relationship of different types of composites
Contents
Introduction and Classification of Composites [6 lectures]: Composites, matrix: metal matrix composites, polymer
matrix composites, ceramic matrix composites, fiber reinforcements: fiber types, particulate reinforcements,
nanocomposites
Design and Manufacturing of Composites [14 lectures]: Selection of matrix and reinforcement- Reinforcement with
Aligned
Continuous Fibers and Discontinuous fibers, wettability and role of interface; Manufacturing- Hand and
Prepeg layup, Bag molding, Autoclave Processing, Compression Molding, Resin Transfer Molding, Pultrusion;
Metal-Matrix Composites- Solid state and Liquid State processing; Ceramic-Matrix Composites- Solid state,
sol-gel, co-precipitation and hydrothermal techniques
Tailoring Composite Materials [6 lectures]: by component selection, by interface modification, surface
modification, microstructure control
Basic Mechanics of Composites [8 lectures]: Fiber-Matrix interface- theories of adhesion, glass fiber-polyester resin
interface, measurement of bond strength, Elastic properties-unidirectional lamiae, elastic properties of short
fiber composite materials, strength of a unidirectional laminae, fiber pull out, longitudinal and transverse
tensile and compressive strength, in-plane shear strength
Properties and Applications of Composites [8 lectures]: Monotonic properties, fatigue and creep properties of
composites, Applications of Composites- Materials for Lightweight Structures, Materials for civil infrastructure,
Materials for Aerospace components- propeller blades, turbine blades, space applications
Textbook
1. Clyne, T. W. and Hull, D., (2019) An Introduction to Composite Materials, 3rd edition, Cambridge University
Press.
2. Balasubramanian, M., (2013), Composite Materials and Processing, 1st Edition, CRC Press
Reference Book
Matthews F. L. and Rawlings R. D. (1999) Composite Materials, 1st edition, Woodhead Publishing.
Online Course Material
Prof. Nachiketa Tewari, Introduction To Composites, Aerospace Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/104/112104229/
35
Title Polymeric Materials and Processing Number MTL4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The Instructor will:
Provide background on basics of processing, structure and properties of polymers of engineering applications
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain:
1. Basic understanding of structure-property relationship in polymers
2. Knowledge about synthesis, and processing of polymers for engineering applications
Contents
Structure of Polymers [14 lectures]: Basics definitions, molar mass averages, Tacticity and isomerism, Amorphous
and semi-crystalline polymers, free volume theory, crystal structure and its determination, degree of
crystallinity, melting and crystallization, defects in crystalline polymers, polymer blends, block-copolymers,
elastomers (Offered by Chemical Engineering)
Synthesis and Processing of Polymers [14 lectures]: Polymerization conditions and polymer reactions; Melt
Processing, Extrusion, Injection Molding, Thermosets and Thermoforming; Plastics Technology: Molding,
Extrusion, multipolymer systems and composites, additives and compounding; Elastomer Technology:
vulcanization, elastomer compounding (Offered by MT)
Polymer Rheology and Mechanical Behavior [4 lectures]: Viscous flow, Storage and Loss modulus, visco-elasticity
- creep, stress relaxation, kinetic theory of rubber elasticity (Offered by MT)
Characterization of Polymers [10 lectures]: Measurement of molecular weight and size: end group analysis,
thermal analysis, colligative property measurement, dynamic light scattering, gel permeation
chromatography, X-ray scattering, Spectroscopic methods (Offered by MT)
Laboratory Experiments
NA
Textbook
Young R.J. and Lovell P.A. (2011) Introduction to Polymers, 3rd Edition, CRC Press
Reference Books
1. Chanda M. (2006) Introduction to Polymer Science & Chemistry, CRC Press
2. Baird,D.G, Collias,D.I., (2014), Polymer Processing, Wiley
Online Course Material
Adhikari B, Science & Technology of Polymers, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Metallurgy & Material
Science, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028/
36
Title Ceramics and Glass Number MT4XX
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Pre-requisite -
Objectives
The main objective of this course is to
Impart and introduce the basic concepts and uses of ceramics and glass.
Learning Outcomes
Upon successful completion of the course the student
1. Would have the knowledge of basic science and technology involved in ceramic materials and glass.
2. Be cognizant of various processing techniques involved in the creation of products.
Contents
Ceramic Compounds & Materials [8 lectures]: Chemistry of ceramics, crystal structure and bonding in ceramic
materials, defect chemistry in ceramics, Polymorphism, Ceramic raw materials (Clay, Silicate, Zirconia),
Mechanical and Thermal properties of ceramics
Sintering and Microstructure of Ceramics [6 lectures]: Thermodynamics and kinetics, Mass Transport, Solid phase
sintering, Liquid phase sintering, Sintering additives, Pressure sintering
Ceramic Processing [8 lectures]: Ceramic Powder Characterization, Rheological behaviour of slurries, Particle
packing, Forming Processes: Dry pressing, Semi dry pressing, Plastic forming method: extrusion and injection
molding, Sol-gel processing, Casting methods: slip casting, tape casting, Drying and Firing process
Non-oxide Ceramics [2 lectures]: Silicon nitride, Aluminum nitride, Silicon carbide, Boron carbide
Industrial Applications of Ceramics [9 lectures]: Refractories, Abrasives, Whitewares, Cement, Ceramic Coatings,
Nuclear Ceramics, Bio Ceramics
Glass [9 lectures]: Structure of glass, Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Glass, Physics of glass, Thermal &
Mechanical properties, Coloring, Glass production, Glass-Ceramics
Laboratory Experiments
1. Chemical Analysis of Raw materials
2. Characterization of Ceramic powder: Tap density, Particle Size Analysis
3. Thermal analysis of ceramic powders using DTA / TGA / DTGA
4. Ceramic powder preparation:
5. Measurement of Green Strength and Green Density of Ceramics
6. Sintering of Ceramics: Measurement of sintering density, microstructure and phase analysis
7. Casting and Forming Lab
8. Preparation of Soda-Lime-Silica glass with different colouring oxides, e.g. CoO, FeO etc.
9. Preparation of Boro-silicate glass with alkali & alkaline earth oxides.
Text Books
1. Kingery,W.D., Bowen, H.K., and Uhlmann, D.R., Introduction to Ceramics, John Wiley & Sons
2. Barsoum,M.W., Fundamentals of Ceramics, CRC Press
3. Shelby,J.E., (2005) Introduction to Glass Science and TechnologyThe Royal Society of Chemistry
Self-Learning Materials
1. Reed,J.S., Introduction to the principles of ceramic processing
4. Tooley,F.V., Hand Book of Glass Manufacture – Vol. I & II, Ogden Publishing Co., NY
Online Course Material
Juejun Hu, Amorphous Materials, DMSE MIT, MIT OCW, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-
and-engineering/3-071-amorphous-materials-fall-2015/index.htm
37
Title Casting and Solidification Number MT6XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Impart fundamental understanding of various casting processes and the theory of solidification
2. Discuss design methodology and process parameters involve in obtaining defect free casting.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
Understand of solidification of metals and alloys and correlating with various casting processes
Contents
Conventional and Special Casting Techniques [14 Lecture]: Casting Terminology, Types of pattern and allowances,
Applications and Challenges; Expendable and Permanent Mould Casting Processes. Special casting
techniques: investment casting, rheocasting and thixocasting, squeeze casting, high and low pressure die
casting, continuous casting.
Solidification of metals and alloys [14 Lecture]: Heat flow, plain front solidification, cellular solidification,
constitutional undercooling, formation of dendrites, eutectic solidification, monotectic solidification.
Gating design and casting defects [14 Lecture]: Fluid flow, gating and riser design, Adams’ and Caine’s riser
design, fluidity. Casting defects: classification, remedial measures, quality assessment.
Textbooks
Flemings,M.C., Solidification Processing (1974), Mcgraw-Hill Book Company
Campbell,J., (2015), Complete casting Handbook: Metal Casting Processes, Metallurgy, Techniques and Design,
Butterworth-Heinmann
Reference Books
1. Heine R. W, Loper C. R., and Rosenthal P. C., (2008), Principles of Metal Casting, Tata McGraw Hill
2. Davies, G. J., (1973) Solidification and Casting, Wiley,
3. Stefanescu, D. M., Science and Engineering of Casting Solidification, (2015), 3rd edition, Springer
Online Course Materials
Karunakar, D.B., Metal Casting, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mechanical and Industrial
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 112107083/
38
Title Metallurgy of Joining Number MT6XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Program Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The Instructor will:
Introduce the basics of materials joining techniques and the associated metallurgy of welds
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand the importance of the materials joining in structural applications.
2. Study the fundamentals of welding microstructures and properties
Contents
Materials Joining basics [6 lectures]: Materials joining basics, type of joints, Types of welding techniques, heat
input and joining efficiency, importance of welding in structural applications
Fusion welding [8 lectures]: Important welding techniques such as submerged arc welding, flux core arc welding,
tungsten inert gas welding, Metal inert gas welding, plasma arc welding, electron beam welding, laser beam
welding.
Solid state welding [8 lectures]: Important welding techniques like Diffusion bonding, friction welding, friction
stir welding, adhesive joining, ultrasonic welding, forge welding
Metallurgy of fusion welding [8 lectures]: Fusion zone, partially melted zone, heat affected zone, residual stresses
in welding, epitaxial growth during welding, heat transfer in welding
Metallurgy of solid state welding [6 lectures]: materials plasticization, bonding interfaces, effect of processing
parameters, heat input in welding
Case Studies [6 lectures]: fusion welding of Al alloys, Friction stir welding of Mg alloys, Laser beam welding of Al alloys
and steel
Textbook
1. Kou S., (2003), Welding Metallurgy, 2rd Edition, Jhon Willey and Sons, New Jersey, United States
2. Lippold J.C., (2015) Welding Metallurgy and Weldability, Jhon Willey and Sons, New Jersey, United States
Reference Books
Reeser M.A., (2017), Welding complete: Techniques, project plans and instructions, cool springs press, MA
USA.
39
Title Battery Materials Number MTL4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite Thermodynamics, Corrosion
Objectives
Through this course the instructor
Will provide an insight of development of battery materials
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain knowledge on:
1. Cycling behaviour of the batteries.
2. Development of different types of batteries demanding on application, Merits and demerits of each
batteries.
3. Materials developed so far and future goals to be achieved.
Contents
Introduction to Electrochemistry [8 lectures]: Chemical and Electrochemical Reactions, Components of
electrochemical cells, Operation of a Cell, Self-Discharge, Theoretical Cell Voltage, Capacity, and Energy,
Specific Energy and Energy Density, Thermodynamic Background, Variation of the Voltage with Discharging
and Recharging, Cycling Behaviour.
Battery Characteristics, Performance, Design, Selection & Standardization [2 lectures]: General Characteristics and
Factors Affecting Battery Performance, Battery Design and Construction, Selection and Application of
Batteries, Battery Standardization
History and evolution of Batteries [6 lectures]: Primary Batteries, voltaic pile, Daniell cell, Zinc-Carbon Batteries,
Alkaline-Manganese Dioxide Batteries, Secondary Batteries, Lead-Acid Batteries, Nickel-Iron Batteries, Nickel-
Cadmium Batteries, Nickel-Zinc Batteries, Nickel-Hydrogen Batteries, Nickel-Metal Hydride Batteries,
Lithium-Ion Batteries.
Development of Negative Electrodes [8 lectures]: The lead electrode, Aluminium and Magnesium electrode, Zinc
and Cadmium Electrode in Aqueous Systems, Metal Hydride Electrodes, Negative Electrodes in Lithium Cells
Development of Positive Electrodes [8 lectures]: Manganese Dioxide/ The “Nickel” Electrode / Lead oxide
electrode/ Oxygen electrode Electrodes in Aqueous Systems.
Development of Electrolytes [10 lectures]: Liquid Electrolytes, General Considerations Regarding the Stability of
Electrolytes Vs. Alkali Metals, Elevated Temperature Electrolytes for Alkali Metals, Electrolyte Stability
Windows and Their Extension, Composite Structures That Combine Stability Regimes, Solid Electrolytes.
Laboratory Experiments
NA
Textbook
Huggins R. A. (2009) Advanced Batteries: Materials Science Aspects, 1st Edition, Springer
Reference Books
Linden D. and Reddy T. B. (2002) Handbook of Batteries, 3rd Edition, The McGraw-Hill Companies
Online Course Material
Prof. Bazant M., MITopencourseware: Electrochemical Energy Systems, MIT Course Number 10.626 / 10.426,
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemical-engineering/10-626-electrochemical-energy-systems-spring-2014/
40
Title 3-D Printing: Material Processing and Properties Number MTL4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. Materials Engineering Type PE
Prerequisite Nil
Objectives
The Instructor will introduce:
1. Importance of 3-D printing of materials for various range of applications
2. Process control and product quality evaluation through application of basics
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain:
1. Insight of the evolutionary technology for rapid and cost effective growth of products
2. Aptitude to translate the knowledge into novel components with industrialization competitiveness
Contents
Introduction [5 lectures]: 3-D printing small but multipurpose product inspiration, Science fiction to innovation,
Multidisciplinary terminology, Current system configurations, Construction, Classification
Hardware – software – material Interdependence [5 lectures]: Essence of hardware, software and materials, Impact
on systems engineering in various industries, Processing philosophy
Raw Materials [4 lectures]: Forms and sources of raw materials, Processing methods and characteristic
properties, Material specifications based industries and processing technology e.g. aerospace, medicine
3-D Printing Processes [2 lectures]: Process flow and basics of stages involved, Process control, Upgrading
options, 3-D product design, evaluation, justification and integration (DEJI) model
Additive Manufacturing of Metallic Systems [5 lectures]: Light metals and alloys, Superalloys, Intermetallic
compounds, Shape memory alloys, porous metals, Rare earth permanent magnets
Thermo-mechanical Effects [2 lectures]: Phase transformation, Microstructure evolution, Variation in properties,
Thermo-mechanical modeling of microstructure evolution and mechanical properties
3-D Printing of Polymers and Hydrogels [5 lectures]: Natural polymers, Synthetic polymers, Design
considerations and guidelines, Mechanics modeling, AM of tooling for mass production processes, 3-D
bioprinting hardware, Reactive inkjet printing of nylon materials, Stimuli responsive hydrogels, Biopolymer
hydrogel biolinks
3-D Printing of Ceramics and composites [5 lectures]: Processing technology and options, Laminated object
manufacturing, Laser Engineered net shaping, Bio-active ceramics and bio-active glasses, Engineering
ceramics, Green-tape-based AM, Complex ceramic architecture, Metal matrix composites, Ceramic matrix
composites, Polymer matrix composites and their variants, Nano-composites
Special Purpose 3-D Printing [5 lectures]: Functionally grades materials, Bio-medical applications, Biomematic
design model, Frugal design sustainability, Smart material- DNA origami, 4-D printing, Reconstructive
surgery, Patient specific 3-D printing, Hydrogen storage material, Printed and hybrid electronics enabled by
digital AM technologies, Reverse Engineering
Post-processing and Inspection techniques [2 lectures]: Post processing problems and requirements, Rectification
Student Presentation & Discussion [2 lectures]: Concept for developing prototype object, Methodology,
Examining novelty and market acceptability, Translation to business idea
Laboratory Experiments
NA
Textbooks
1. Gibson, I., et al (Eds.) (2015), Additive Manufacturing Technology: 3D printing, Rapid Prototyping, and Direct
Digital Manufacturing, 2nd Ed., Springer
2. Maniruzzaman, M.. (Ed.), (2019), 3D and 4D Printing in Bio-medical Applications: Process-Engineering and
Additive Manufacturing, Wiley- VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
Reference Books
1. Declan, M.D.. (2019), Polymer Based Additive Manufacturing- Biomedical Applications, Springer Nature.
2. Gu, D., (2015), Laser Additive Manufacture of High-Performance Materials, Springer Verlag
41
Online Course Material
1. Ramkumar, J., 2018, NOC: Rapid Manufacturing, Department of Mechanical Engineering; IIT Kanpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/104/112104265/
42
Title Lithium ion batteries Number MTL4XX
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-2 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type PE
Prerequisite Thermodynamics
Objectives
The theoretical and practical limits of battery technology can be a barrier to meeting some performance
requirements. Through this course the instructor will provide a thorough insight of development of battery
materials with future goals to be achieved.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain knowledge on:
1. Cycling behaviour of the batteries.
2. Development of different types of batteries demanding on application, Merits and demerits of each
batteries.
3. Materials developed so far and future goals to be achieved.
Contents
Introduction: [4 lectures] Components of Li ion electrochemical cells, Operation of a Li ion Cell, Reconstitution
and Insertion Reactions, Theoretical Cell Voltage, Capacity, and Energy, Cycling Behaviour, Experimental
Methods to Evaluate the Critical Properties of Electrodes and Electrolytes, Use of DC and AC Methods to
Determine the Electronic and Ionic Components of the Conductivity in Solid Electrolytes and Mixed
Conductors, Influence of Impedances to the Transport of Ionic and Atomic Species within the Cell, Self-
Discharge, Joule Heating to Due to Self-Discharge in Electrochemical Cells.
Negative Electrodes in Lithium ion Cells: [8 lectures] Elemental Lithium Electrodes, drawbacks, Lithium–
Carbon Alloys, Metallic Lithium Alloys, Mixed-Conductor Matrix Electrodes, Convertible Reactant
Electrodes, Electrochemical Behaviour, structural reversibility, Amorphization, Decrepitation, Modification
of the Micro and Nanostructure of the Electrode, Electrodes for aqueous systems.
Positive Electrodes in Lithium ion Cells: [8 lectures] Insertion Reaction, Reconstitution Reaction,
Electrodes, Materials with Layered Structures, Materials with the Spinel Structure, Materials with the
Olivine Structure, Liquid Positive Electrode Reactants: The Li/SO2 System, The Li/SOCl2 System,
Electrodes for aqueous systems, Hybrid Ion Cells, The Oxygen Evolution Problem.
Electrolytes in Lithium ion Cells: [8 lectures] Lithium-Conducting Inorganic Molten Salts,
Lower Temperature Alkali Halide Molten Salts, Ambient Temperature Organic Solvent Liquid
Electrolytes/Ionic liquids, Interaction of Organic Solvent Electrolytes with Graphite, Electrolyte Additives,
Solid Electrolytes, Lithium Ion Conductors: Perovskite and Garnet Structure, Relation Between the Potential
and the Oxygen Pressure in Lithium Systems, Electrolyte Stability Windows and Their Extension, Two Solid
Electrolytes in Series, Implications for the Safety of Lithium Cells.
Laboratory Experiments
1. Introduction to LIBs, different parts of LIB, different size and shapes, applications
2. Synthesis of graphite and metal-alloys based negative electrodes for LIB
3. Synthesis of oxide, phosphate and silicate based positive electrodes for LIB
4. Fabrication of lithium half cells and full cells
5. Cycle behaviour, charge/discharge characteristics and performance analysis of LIB
6. Voltammetry study and analysis of electrochemical behaviour through impedance spectroscopy
7. Exploration of degradation mechanism of oxide and phosphate-based LIBs
8. Aging and self-discharge characteristics of oxide and phosphate-based LIB
9. Short-circuit and thermal runaway failure of oxide and phosphate-based LIB
10. Thermal imaging and calorific study of parasitic reactions
11. Battery management system, balancing and development of smart charger for LIBs
Textbook
1. Masaki Yoshio M., Brodd R. J. and Kozawa A. (2010) Lithium-Ion Batteries: Science and Technologies,
Springer
2. Toll M. (2017) DIY Lithium Batteries: How to Build Your Own Battery Packs, Toll Publishing
43
Reference Books
1. Huggins R. A. (2009) Advanced Batteries: Materials Science Aspects, 1st Edition, Springer
2. Linden D. and Reddy T. B. (2002) Handbook of Batteries, 3rd Edition, The McGraw-Hill Companies
Online Course Material
1. Dr. WALKER W. Q., Short course on lithium-ion batteries: fundamental concepts, heating mechanisms and
simulation techniques, Nasa Johnson space center, Structural engineering division, Thermal design branch.
2. Prof. Bazant M., MITopencourseware: Electrochemical Energy Systems, MIT Course Number 10.626 /
10.426, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemical-engineering/10-626-electrochemical-energy-systems-
spring-2014/
3. Prof. Maiti H.S., Advanced ceramics for strategic applications, NPTEL, Metallurgy and Materials Science,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/105/113105015/
44
Title Surface Engineering Number MTL6XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide knowledge on the importance of surface engineering in materials protection and design
2. Introduce various advanced surface engineering techniques available in the industry
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand the basics of various advanced surface engineering techniques
2. Understand the limitations of standard materials and how they can be improved with surface engineering
3. Identify the surface treatment best suited to a specific application
Contents
Fundamentals of surface engineering [10 Lectures]: definition, scope, classification, and general principles, surface
dependent properties and failures, Surface and surface energy: Structure and types of interfaces. Protection
from wear and corrosion by surface engineering. Enhancing the performance of thermal protection systems,
biocompatibility, and other functional properties of materials by surface engineering.
Surface engineering Techniques [24 Lectures]: Surface engineering by energy beams: Laser assisted microstructural
modification –Laser assisted compositional modification – surface cladding. Electron beam assisted
modification and joining. Ion beam assisted microstructure and compositional modification. Surface
engineering by spray techniques: Principle and scope of applications of Flame spraying, Plasma coating,
HVOF, cold spray. Characterization of surface microstructure and properties (name of the techniques and brief
operating principle). Evaporation - Thermal / Electron beam, Sputter deposition of thin films & coatings – DC
& RF, Sputter deposition of thin films & coatings –Chemical vapor deposition and PECVD, Plasma and ion
beam assisted surface modification, Surface modification by Ion implantation and Ion beam mixing.
Characterization of surfaces [8 Lectures]: Measurement of coatings thickness, porosity & adhesion of surface
coatings, Measurement of residual stress & stability, Surface microscopy, topography and Spectroscopic
analysis of modified surfaces.
Textbooks
1. Davis,J.R, (2001), Surface Engineering for Corrosion and Wear Resistance, ASM International,.
2. Budinski K., (1990), Surface Engineering for Wear Resistance, Prentice Hall.
Reference Book
1. Ernest, R., Friction and Wear of Materials, (1995), John Wiley and Sons, New York.
2. Surface Engineering, (2001) ASM Metals Handbook, Vol. 5, Ohio
Self-Learning Material
1. Kallol, M. and Sandeep. S., Heat Treatment and Surface Hardening – I NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104074/
2. Kaushik P., Surface Engineering of Nanomaterials, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mechanical and
Industrial Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113107075/
45
Title Synthesis and Processing of Semiconductors
and 2D materials
Number MTL3XX0
Department Metallurgical & Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory
(PC)
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Introduce different synthesis and fabrication techniques used for semiconductor device fabrication.
2. Introduce different synthesis techniques used for 2D materials
Learning Outcomes
After completion of the course students will be have a basic understanding of different semiconductor device
fabrication techniques as well as gain knowledge how to synthesize various 2D materials
Contents
General Introduction (1 Lecture)
Semiconductor processing [17 Lectures]: Silicon Wafer Fabrication Physical vapour deposition methods: e-beam,
pulsed laser and ion beam evaporation, Glow, Discharge and Plasma, Sputtering–mechanisms and yield, DC
and
RF sputtering, Chemical vapour deposition: Sol-gel, Spin Coating, Atomic Layer deposition, CVD, PECVD,
MOCVD,
solution processing techniques, (printing, spin coating, chemical bath depositions, etc.). Semiconductor
Integration with Functional oxides and Challenges in fabrication
2D Materials Processing [Lectures 13]: Different types of 2D materials, Strategies and challenges of 2D materials
synthesis: micromechanical exfoliation, ultrasonic exfoliation, hydrothermal method, topochemical
transformation, chemical vapor deposition, Top Down vs Bottom up, Production of graphene and 2-d
materials:
Comparison of production methods, Scotch-tape method (micromechanical cleavage), Chemical vapour
deposition, Solution-exfoliation 1 – graphene and other 2-d materials, Solution-exfoliation 2 – graphene oxide,
Decomposition of silicon carbide, Production of graphene nano-ribbons, Synthesis of hexagonal boron nitride,
and transition metal dichalcogenides, to new and emerging materials such as black phosphorus, silicene, and
germanene.
Lithography and Etching [Lectures 6]: Pattern Formation, Optical Lithography, Resists, Wet Chemical Etching,
Reactive Ion Etching, Ion implantation doping
Metallization and Polishing [Lectures 2]
Cleanroom & Contamination [Lectures 3]: Cleanroom standards, Contamination and yield, Environment, safety
and health
Textbook
1. Ohring, M., (2002), The materials science of Thin films, 2nd Edition, Academic Press Ltd.
2. Chopra, K. L., (1969), Thin Film Phenomena, McGraw-Hill Book Company
Reference Books
1. Editor Gogotsi, Y., (2019), 2D Metal Carbides and Nitrides (MXenes): Structure, Properties and Applications,
Springer
2. Shinohara, H., Tiwari, A., (2015), Graphene: an introduction to the fundamentals and industrial applications.
John Wiley & Sons
Online Course Material
Parasuraman Swaminathan, Electronic materials, devices and fabrication, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, IIT Madras,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/106/113106062/
46
Title Biomaterials Engineering Number BSBE 4XX0
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide an insight on the fundamental concepts of biomaterials engineering.
2. Give an overview of techniques for characterizations of different types of biomaterials for various
applications.
Learning Outcomes
The students will have the ability to:
1. Analyze the suitability of the material to be used as a biomaterial.
2. Compare the performance of different biomaterials.
3. Design a strategy for modification of biomaterials for a specific application.
Contents
Fundamental of Biomaterials [14 Lectures]: Introduction to biomaterials, types of biomaterials, processing of
biomaterials, surface properties and surface modification of biomaterials, physicochemical characterization of
biomaterials. (by MM department)
Biological Properties of Biomaterials [14 Lectures]: Concepts of biocompatibility, immune-compatibility,
hemocompatibility and biodegradability, Bioconjugations, Biomineralization, Biological characterization of
biomaterials (by BSBE)
Applications of Biomaterials [14 Lectures]: Biomimetic and stealth biomaterials, types and applications of
implants, biomaterials for drug delivery systems, biomaterials for tissue engineering, regulatory affairs (by
BSBE)
Text Books
Basu,B., (2017), Biomaterials Science and Tissue Engineering, First edition, Cambridge University Press
Reference Books
Shelly, E., Elbert, S, Zhang, G., (2020), Biomaterials Science: An Introduction to Materials in Medicine, Edited by
William R Wagner, Michael J. Yaszemski, 4th edition, Academic Press Inc.
Self-Learning Material
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104009/
47
Title Functional Ceramics Number MTL4XX0
Department Department of Metallurgical and Materials
Engineering
L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for BTech/PhD Type PE
Prerequisite Semiconductor Devices
Objectives
The instructor will:
Provide in-depth knowledge into the electronic, magnetic, and optical properties of ceramic materials systems
and their properties
Learning Outcomes
On successful completion of the course, the students would be:
1. Know the relationships between ceramic structure (electronic, microstructural, and defect structure) and
the wide variety of properties they display.
2. Learn how these variety of phenomena can be exploited in useful applications like sensors, and
piezoelectric transducers
3. Access Current day research topics on electronic magnetic and optical materials.
Contents
General Introduction [1 Lecture]
Crystallography and Bonding [6 Lectures]: Structures, Bonding in Ceramics Structure formation rules in Oxides,
Important structures in Oxides.
Defects [5 Lecture hours]: Defects in ceramics and defect chemistry, Defects diffusion and equilibrium
Electrical conductivity [5 Lectures]: Conduction Mechanisms in Ceramics, Resistors, varistors and thermistors
Dielectrics, ferro- and piezo-electrics [16 Lectures]: Capacitor Materials, Dielectric Breakdown, High and low
permittivity materials, Microwave and tunable dielectrics, Ferroelectric memories, Piezoelectric materials:
PZT, BaTiO3, Morphotropic Phase boundary, Electrostriction, Pyroelectric materials: Thermal Imaging, IR
detectio
Magnetic Ceramics [3 Lectures]: General Properties, Magnetic ferrites, Magneto crystalline anisotropy,
Magnetostriction, Applications
Electro-optical Properties [3 Lectures]: Electro-optic effect, Non-Linear optics, Birefringence, PLZT material and
structure
Material processing [3 Lectures]: Thin film and Bulk processing
Textbook
1. Electroceramics: Materials, Properties and Applications by A. J. Moulson and J. M. Herbert, Chapman and
Hall, 2nd Edition, 1990.
2. Kofstad, Per. "Nonstoichiometry, diffusion, and electrical conductivity in binary metal oxides." (1972).
Reference Books
1. Introduction to solid State Physics by Charles Kittel, Wiley Eastern, 5th Edition, 1983
2. Newnham, R. E. (2012). Structure-property relations (Vol. 2). Springer Science & Business Media
Online Course Material
1. Ashish Garg, Electroceramics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Material Science & Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104005/
2. Ashish Garg, Fundamentals and Applications of Dielectric Ceramics, NPTEL Course Material, Department
of Material Science & Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104090/
48
Title Magnetism and Magnetic Materials Number MTL4XX0
Department L-T-P [C] (3-0-0) [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge on Quantum Mechanics
Objectives
The course will provide knowledge of underlying phenomena of magnetism. Emphasis will be on the
preparation process & characterisation methods of magnetic materials used for Engineering applications
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability of understanding magnetic phenomena, and metallurgical aspect
of developing magnetic materials. They will also get an exposure of engineering application of magnetic
methods and magnetic materials.
Contents
Origin of magnetism, Bohr Magnetron, Classification of magnetic materials, Weiss molecular field (4L)
Magnetism in Metals and Insulators, Exchange Interaction, Magnetic Anisotropy and Magnetostriction, (6L)
Domain and Domain Walls, Magnetic Hysteresis and Barkhausen Emissions, Techniques for Characterisation
of Magnetic Materials, Superconductor and Superconducting Magnets, Structure Property Relations (8L),
Soft Magnetic Materials: Nickel Iron Alloys, Cobalt-Iron alloys, Electrical steel (CRNO, CRGO and
amorphous), Amorphous & Nanostructured magnetic alloys. (6L)
Hard Magnetic Materials: Alnico, NdFeB, SmCo (6L)
Soft & Hard Ferrites, Magnetic Shape Memory and Magnetocaloric Materials (6L),
Application of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials (2L)
Text/Reference Book:
1. Chih-Wen Chen, Magnetism and Metallurgy of Soft magnetic Materials, Dover Publications, INC. New
York, ISBN 0-486-64997
2. B.D. Cullity, Introduction to Magnetic Materials, Addison-Wesley publishing company, California,
London,
3. D. C. Jiles, Introduction to Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, Chapman & Hill, London, 1991.
4. (iv) S. Chikazumi, Physics of Ferromagnetism, Oxford University Press 1997, Reprinted in 2002, ISBN: 0-
19-851776-9
49
Title Computational Thermodynamics Number MTL6XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3]
Offered for B.Tech (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite
Objectives
Understanding the correlation between the phase diagram and chemical thermodynamics for alloy design.
Learning Outcomes
Ability to construct multicomponent phase diagrams using computational thermodynamic approach.
Contents
1. Thermodynamics of Solution [7 Lectures]: Thermochemistry of solutions. Evolution of phase diagrams -
quasichemical theory, Sub regular solution model.
2. Calculation of thermodynamic parameters [7 Lectures]: First principle calculation, Semi-empirical-Miedema
approach. Calorimetric measurement, electrochemical measurement,
3. Calculation of multicomponent phase diagram [14 Lectures]: Redlitch-kister polynomial, Muggianu and kohler
extrapolation. Crystallography in thermodynamics, Order and disorder structure, antisite defect and
vacancies. Compound energy formalism. Modeling of Interstitial and substitutional phases, stoichiometric
and non-stoichiometric compounds.
Lab Experiments
1. Construction of equilibrium and non-equilibrium phase diagram,
2. Vertical section phase diagram and Property diagram for multi-component alloys,
3. Scheil and equilibrium solidification simulation,
4. Liquidus projections and monovariant reactions in ternary phase equilibria,
5. Creation of user defined thermodynamic database.
Textbooks
1. Saunders and Miodownik, (1998), CALPHAD (Calculation of Phase Diagrams): A Comprehensive Guide, 1st
Edition, Pergamman Press,
2. Lukas,H., Suzana,G., Fries, B.S., (2007), Computational Thermodynamics: The Calphad Method, Cambridge
University Press,
Self-Learning Material
Porter, D.A., Easterling, K. E., and Sherif, M.Y., (2009), Phase Transformation in Metals and Alloys, 3rd Edition,
CRC Press
Online Course Materials
Murty, B.S., Advanced Metallurgical Thermodynamics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Metallurgical
and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106031/.
50
Title Mineral Beneficiation Number MTL4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The Instructor will:
Introduce the principles of physical separation methods, simulation, and instrumentation related
to mineral processing
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
Ability to engineer selective mineral processing based on material and environment conditions
Contents
Introduction to Mineral Geology [2 lectures]: Geological formation of minerals. Classification and identification of
minerals
Introduction to Mineral Beneficiation [4 lectures]: Mineral Beneficiation Plant, Materials handling, Sampling,
Sizing of ore particles- sieve analysis and testing, particle size distribution
Comminution and Screening [10 lectures]: Liberalization of dissimilar minerals, Degree of liberalization,
comminution- fracture, laws of comminution, crushing – Primary and secondary crusher, crushing operation,
Ginding- Ball milling, Wet and Dry Grinding, Chemical Comminution-leaching, dissolution, Screening- types,
factors affecting rate of screening, screening efficiency
Separation and Concentration of ores [14 lectures]: Classification mechanical sorting, Gravity separation or
concentration- Float and sink, heavy medium separation, Jigging, Flowing film concentration, Froth Floatation-
floating reagents, types of floatation, Surface properties and selective flotation of ores, floatation for Sulphide
ores, flocculation, Magnetic and Electrical Separation
Solid-Liquid Separation [4 lectures]: Settling of solids in fluids, Solid-Liquid separation-Dewatering, Mechanical
Dewatering of Slurries and Liquid-Liquid processing methods, Filtering
Applications and Examples [8 lectures]: Mineral beneficiation of Zn, Cu, Fe, Pb ores, Heap leaching of Au,
Mineral Processing of special materials (from brine and mineral resources), rare earths, vanadium, etc.
Textbooks
1. Wills,B.A. and Napier-Munn,T.J., (2006), Mineral Processing Technology, Elsevier Science & Technology
Books, 7th Edition
2. Subbarao,D.V., (2011), Mineral Beneficiation: A Concise Basic Course, CRC Press
Reference Books
1. Drzymala, J., (2007), Mineral Processing: foundations of theory and practice of minerallurgy, Wroclaw
University of Technology
2. German,R.M., (2005), Powder Metallurgy & Particulate Materials Processing, Metal Powder Industry
Online Course Materials
Majmuder, A., Introduction to Mineral Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mining
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105171/
51
Title Kinetics of Metallurgical Processes Number MTL4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective
Prerequisite -
Objectives
This course aims to cover:
Various kinetic aspects of metallurgical processes encountered in during metal extraction
Learning Outcomes
The students will be able to:
Identify the rate controlling mechanism for a metallurgical process
Contents
Introduction and Kinetics of Homogeneous Reaction [6 lectures]: Scope of metallurgical kinetics, rate processes,
rate of reaction, Rate equation, molecularity and order of reactions; reaction mechanism, temperature
dependence of reaction rate-Arrhenius equation and activation energy
Interpretation of Batch Reaction Data [8 lectures]: Irreversible first order, second order, and third order reaction,
zero-order reaction, overall order of reaction from half-life, homogeneous catalyzed reactions, irreversible
reactions in series, General and first order reversible reactions
Chemically Controlled Reactions [8 lectures]: Reaction steps and rate controlling step, reaction between a solid
and a fluid, interfacial reaction control-kinetic law, reduction of Hematite by CO or H2, Examples of leaching
reaction- Ammonia leaching and acid leaching of Chalcopyrite, Chemisorption, Total internal reaction
Diffusion through product layer [8 lectures]: Reaction of a flat plate and of a spherical solid, Diffusion through
porous solid, Example: packed bed, leaching of Sulphide minerals
Fluid Phase mass transfer [12 lectures]: Mass Transfer Across a Boundary Layer, Mass Transfer at Solid–Fluid
Interface, Dissolution of a Solid in a Liquid, Electrochemical Mechanism in Leaching, Smelting reduction
process- reduction of FeO in slag, reaction between two fluids-mass transfer across two fluid interface, slag-
metal reaction, mass-transfer as a rate controlling step
Laboratory Experiments
NA
Textbook
1. Ray, H.S., Ray, S.K., (2018), Kinetics of Metallurgical Processes, 1st Edition, Springer
2. Ghosh, A., Ghosh, S., (2014), Textbook of Metallurgical Kinetics, PHI Learning Private Limited
Reference Books
1. Levenspiel, O., (2006), Chemical Reaction Engineering, 3rd Edition, John Wiley and Sons.
2. Wilkinson, D.S., (2000), Mass Transport in Solids and Fluids, Cambridge Univeristy Press
Online Course Material
Prof. B. Mandal, Chemical Reaction Engineering-I, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103153/
52
Title Principles of Process Metallurgy Number MT4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Introduce methods for the calculation of mass and energy balance for various metal extraction processes
2. Expose the students to various process control and transport phenomena for various metal extraction
processes
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Apply the principles of thermodynamics and transport phenomena to understand and control
metallurgical processes
2. Relate the basic phenomena and process output through mass and energy calculations
Contents
Metal-slag interactions [6 Lectures]: Thermo-physical properties of metals and slags, slag-metal equilibrium
calculations, application of slag capacity during metal refining
Process phenomena [6 Lectures]: bubble formation, foaming, gas-liquid reactions, reactions between liquid
phases
Process control in metallurgical processes [6 Lectures]: Iron making, converter steel making, electric arc furnace,
secondary steel making
Mass and Energy balance in Iron and Steel Making [8 Lectures]: Materials Balance in Iron making, Blast furnace
stoichiometry, Enthalpy balance in blast furnace. Material and heat balance in converting. Material and heat
balance in steel making by L.D converters and open-hearth furnace.
Mass and energy balance in calcination and roasting [8 Lectures]: Calcination - Principles of calcination, Materials
and heat balance in calcinations. Roasting - Introduction, Sources of energy, Determination of calorific value
of gaseous fuel, Amount of air, Materials balance calculation in roasting. Basics of heat balance in roasting.
Calculation Procedure for Roasting Temperature.
Mass and energy balance in non-ferrous smelting [8 Lectures] Matte smelting, Industrial copper smelting. Material
balance and heat balance problems in matte smelting. Reduction smelting, Material balance in zinc and lead
smelting, Material and heat balance in Imperial Smelting Process.
Textbooks
1. Sano N., Lu W., Riboud P., (1997), Advanced Physical Chemistry for Process Metallurgy, Academic Press,
2. Shamsuddin M., (2016), Physical Chemistry of Metallurgical Processes, John Wiley & Sons.
3. Alan Fine H, Gordon H. Geiger, (1998), Handbook on Material and Energy Balance Calculations in Metallurgical
Processes, 2nd Revised Edition, Wiley.
Self-Learning Materials
Ray, H.S., and Ghosh, A., (1991), Principles of extractive metallurgy, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi
Online Course Materials
1. Muzumdar, D., and Koria, S.C., Steel Making, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Material Science
and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104013/
2. Ray, H.S., Non-ferrous Extractive Metallurgy, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Materials and
Metallurgical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/105/113105021/
53
Title Hydrometallurgy Number MTL4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
This course aims to cover:
1. Thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of leaching as a hydrometallurgical technique of metal extraction
2. Purification of leach liquors by ion exchange, solvent extraction, adsorption using active carbon, selective
precipitation operations, and solid-liquid separation techniques.
3. Several practical leaching processes for nonferrous metal extraction and processing.
Learning Outcomes
The students will be able to:
1. Understand the thermodynamics and kinetics of leaching and how it impacts the design of a
hydrometallurgical process.
2. Discuss the concepts and design of separation and purification of leach liquors including solvent
extraction; ion exchange; precipitation; crystallisation; and membrane treatment.
3. Explain the concepts and design of metal recovery processes
Contents
Introduction and Chemical fundamentals of hydrometallurgy [8 lectures]: Mineral Deposition, lean ore, Aqueous
Processing and Utilization of Metals, Chemical Potential, Equilibrium, Solubility Product, Relationships
Amongst K, pK, pKa, and pH
Speciation and phase diagram [8 lectures]: Speciation (Ion Distribution) Diagrams, Metal-Ligand Speciation
Diagrams, Phase Stability Diagrams
Rate processes [14 lectures]: Chemical/Electrochemical/Biochemical Reaction Kinetics, Reaction Kinetics, Mass
Transport, Combined Mass Transport and Reaction Kinetics, Models for Reactions Involving Particles,
Crystallization Kinetics
Metal extraction: [12 lectures]: Separation of dissolved metals, metal recovery processes, metal utilization
Laboratory Experiments
NA
Textbook
Free,M.L., (2013) Hydrometallurgy: Fundamentals and Applications, 1st Edition, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
Hoboken, New Jersey
Reference Books
Havlik, T., (2008) Hydrometallurgy: Principles and Applications, CRC Press Woodhead Publishing
Online Course Material
Prof. H.S. Ray, Non-ferrous Extractive Metallurgy, NPTEL Course Material, Metallurgy & Material Science,
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105021/
54
Title Electrometallurgy Number MTL4XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The aims to cover
1. The principles and applications of aqueous electrochemistry in extractive metallurgy.
2. Analysis of the thermodynamic and electro-chemical kinetic phenomena in aqueous and non-aqueous
electrowinning and electrorefining of metals.
Learning Outcomes
The student should be able to:
1. Have knowledge and understanding of the existing electrometallurgical processes,
2. Analyze, conceive and conceptually design novel electrometallurgical processes
Contents
Introduction, Definitions, Principles and Concepts [8 lectures]: Electrodes and electrochemical reactions, cell and
circuit, The Nernst equation and energy producing cells, Electrolysis, Faraday’s law, Electro-crystallization.
Surface Morphology of Metal Electrodeposits [10 lectures]: Thin Compact Surface Metal Films, Thick Compact
Metal Electrodeposits, Nucleation rate and deposition overpotential, Deposition from simple/ complex salt
solutions with/without the presence of adsorbed additives, Disperse (Spongy, Dendritic, Powdered, Granular,
Whisker) Deposits.
The Current Distribution in Electrochemical Cells [10 lectures]: Two equal plane parallel electrodes arrangement,
Ohmic resistance of the cell, The edge effect, Cell voltage-current density dependencies, Determination of the
current density distribution, Cells with Low Anode Polarisation, Corner Weakness Phenomena in
Electroforming, Electrodeposition at a periodically changing rate.
Applications [14 lectures]: Electrowinning (zinc and aluminium), Electrorefining (copper), Optimum conditions
for electroplating (metals/alloys/composites) from aqueous/non-aqueous/molten salt solutions,
Electropolishing, Electro-machining, Electrochemical Oxidation of Metals.
Laboratory Experiments
NA
Textbook
Popov K. I., Djokic S. S. and Grgur B. N. (2002) Fundamental aspects of electrometallurgy, Kluwer academic
publishers, New York.
Reference Books
Free M., Moats M., Houlachi G., Asselin E., Allanore A., Yurko J., Wang S (2012) Electrometallurgy 2012, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Online Course Material
Prof. H.S. Ray, Non-ferrous Extractive Metallurgy, NPTEL Course Material, Metallurgy & Material Science,
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105021/
55
Title Secondary and Special Steel Making Number MTL6XX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE)
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The Instructor will:
Provide knowledge on various secondary steel making process
Learning Outcomes
Expose students to advanced methods of making super clean steel
Contents
Melt cleanliness and Degassing [14 Lectures]: The concept of cleanliness of steels, non-metallic inclusions,
dissolved gases. Tramp & residual elements in steels and their effect on steel properties. Transport Phenomena
during taping of Liquid Steel- Estimation of Gas absorption during tapping. Importance of Slag free tapping.
Thermodynamic and kinetics of degassing of steel melts. Operation of degassing reactors viz. DH, RH, tank
degassers etc., Re-melting refining technologies. Vacuum Degassing process.
Ladle Metallurgy [14 Lectures]: Thermodynamics & Kinetics of Deoxidation. Types & selection of Deoxidizers,
Metallurgical & Thermodynamic conditions for Good Desulphurization and synthetic slag. Wire Injection
Techniques for increased efficiency of Deoxidation &Desulphurization. Limitations of primary steel making,
unit operations and unit processes in ladle metallurgy. Ladle furnaces design and operation, injection
metallurgy.
Casting and Special steel making process [14 Lectures]: Ingot casting of steel, Segregation, Ingot Defects.
Continuous Casting: Heat Transfer and Solidification, bloom, Billet, Slab and Thin strip Caster, primary and
Secondary Cooling, Process parameters of the caster. Special steel making processes viz. AOD, VOD
continuous steel making etc. Principles of Electroslag remelting (ESR) & Vacuum Arc Remelting (VAR).
Advantages over traditional Secondary Steel Making vs Costs involved.
Text Books
Ghosh, A., (2000), Secondary Steel Making: Principles & Applications, First edition, CRC Press.
Reference Books
1. Ghosh, A., Chatterjee, A., (2012), Iron and Steel Making – Theory & Practice, PHI Leasing Private Ltd.
2. Mazumdar, D., (2015), A First Course in Iron and Steel Making, Universities Press(India) Pvt. Ltd.
Self-Learning Material
Mazumdar. D and Koria S.C., Steel Making, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Metallurgical
Engineering and Materials Science, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104059/