Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
M.Tech. (Metallurgical and Materials Engineering)
Introduction
Metallurgical and Materials Engineering is an interdisciplinary branch that deals with converting
ore into a product by focusing on design, extraction, processing, and characterization of
materials for aerospace, automotive, energy, electronics, and healthcare applications. The
following are the focus areas of the Department: (a) Process Metallurgy, (b) Structural
Materials, (c) Functional Materials, and (d) Computational Materials Engineering. While the
Process Metallurgy deals with mineral beneficiation and metal extraction, the Structural
Materials deals with understanding the process-microstructure-property correlation to expand
the application of a given material. In the Functional Materials research, materials for specific
functions such as energy harvesting, healthcare, and information processing are studied. The
Computational Materials Engineering provides understanding of materials from atomistic to
macro length scales, and help in materials selection, alloy design, and improvement of
metallurgical processes.
Objective
 To produce professionals with deep understanding of experimental and computational
materials engineering, capable of providing innovative solutions for materials challenges
in energy, electronics, aerospace, automotive, and healthcare industries.
 To train the students for the roles of future academicians, scientists, innovators, and
entrepreneurs.
Graduate attributes
 Ability to correlate electronic structure with transport properties of materials
 Skill set to optimize microstructure and determine structure-property correlation
 Ability to design and execute experiments for studying mechanical behavior of materials,
and develop mechanistic models for failure prediction
 Ability to determine metallurgical processing parameters for extraction of ferrous and
non-ferrous metals, and design process cycle to convert ore to final product
 Ability to fabricate components following traditional and non-traditional manufacturing
processes
 Ability to characterize features at atomic, nano-, meso-, micro- and macro- length scales
 Ability to innovate materials for next generation energy, electronic and healthcare
devices
 Skills to communicate the scientific findings to peers and general public
 Appreciation and adherence to professional ethics
 Ability to design and execute technical projects
Learning Outcome
Ability to
 Design the materials by microstructure control to meet the required properties
 Use various modeling techniques for studying physical, mechanical, functional and
transport properties of materials
 Apply thermodynamics and kinetics principles to understand and control materials
processes
 Fabricate structural and functional materials through traditional and non-traditional
manufacturing processes
 Use various material characterization tools
 Apply principles of material deformation to predict failure of materials for reliable design
of structures
 Understand the process metallurgy involved in ferrous and non-ferrous metal extraction
 Define a scientific problem and devise an appropriate methodology for addressing the
problem
 Identify normative commitments of technological knowledge, artifacts and familiarity
with the manifold responsibilities linked to their profession.
 Critically develop linguistic competence and subject competence in the genres of
technical communication.
Program structure with courses
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P-D Credits Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P-D Credits
I Semester II Semester
C MT7LXX0 Metallurgical
Thermodynamics and
Kinetics
3-1-0-0 4 C MT7LXX0 Computational
Materials Engineering
3-0-2-0 4
C MT7LXX0 Characterization of
Minerals, Metals and
Materials
3-0-2-0 4 C MT7LXX0 Phase
Transformations in
Solids
3-0-2-0 4
E MT7LXX0 Program Elective -1 3-0-0-0 3 E MT7LXX0 Program Elective-3 3-0-0-0 3
E MT7LXX0 Program Elective -2 3-0-0-0 3 E MT7LXX0 Program Elective-4 3-0-0-0 3
NH HSN7XX0 Technical
Communication
1-0-0-0 0 NH HSN7XX0 Professional Ethics 1-0-0-0 0
Total 14 Total 14
III Semester IV Semester
E MT7LXX0 Program Elective-5 3-0-0-0 3 O Open Elective-2 3-0-0-0 3
E MT7LXX0 Program Elective-6 3-0-0-0 3 C MT7DXX0 Project (Stage-II) 0-0-0-11 11
O Open Elective-1 3-0-0-0 3 NH HSN7XX0 IP Management and
Exploitation
1-0-0-0 0
C MT7DXX0 Project (Stage-I) 0-0-0-5 5
NH HSN7XX0 Systems Engineering
and Project
Management
1-0-0-0 0
Total 14 Total 14
Distribution of Credits (M.Tech.)
S.No. Category Category Title Total
Courses
Total Credits
1 C Compulsory 4 16
2 E Program Electives 6 18
2 E Open Electives 2 6
4 C Project 16 16
Total 56
Program electives can be taken from any of the following courses offered by the department.
Open electives may be taken from other departments.
Topic Clouds
1. Metallurgical Thermodynamics and Kinetics
 Laws of thermodynamics
 Thermodynamics of solutions
 Application of Thermodynamics to Chemical reactions
 Phase diagrams
 Thermodynamics of interfaces
 Diffusion in solids
2. Characterization of Minerals Metals and Materials
 Optical Microscopy
 Scanning Electron Microscopy
 Transmission Electron Microscopy
 Scanning Probe Microscopy
 Spectroscopic characterization
 X-Ray Diffraction
 Electron Diffraction.
 Thermal Analysis
 Non-destructive testing of materials
3. Computational Materials Engineering
 First principles calculations
 Molecular dynamics simulations
 Alloy Design
4. Phase Transformations and Solidification
 Thermodynamics of phase transformations
 Solid state phase transformations
 Solidification process
 Gating and riser design for casting
 Nucleation and growth
5. Material Processing
 Light Metal and Alloys
o Processing of light metals and alloys
 Additive manufacturing
o Materials for additive manufacturing
o Additive manufacturing methods
o Structure-property control in additive manufacturing
 Thermo Mechanical Processing
o Principles and applications of thermo- mechanical processing
6. Microstructure Design and Mechanical Properties
 Effect of microstructure on mechanical properties
 Strengthening mechanisms
 High Temperature deformation
 Deformation behavior of ceramics and polymeric materials
 Theory of fracture mechanics
 Cyclic deformation of materials
 Creep-Fatigue interaction
7. Electrochemistry and Corrosion
 Fundamentals of electrochemistry
 Forms of corrosion
 Corrosion Prevention methods
 High temperature oxidation
 Corrosion monitoring
8. Ceramics and Composites
 Structural Ceramics
 Processing of ceramics
 Functional ceramics
 Metal Matrix Composites
 Polymer Matrix Composites
 Ceramic matrix composites
List of Electives
Following is the list of courses that can be offered to M.Tech. Students
(A) ELECTIVE I: Materials Modeling and Simulation
Course
Number
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits
MT7LXX0 Alloy Design : Computational Thermodynamic
approach
3-0-2-0 4
(B) ELECTIVE II: Extractive and Process Metallurgy
Course
Number
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits
MT7LXX0 Mineral Engineering 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Iron and Steel Making 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Solidification Processing 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Industrial Waste: Control and Utilization 3-0-0-0 3
(C) ELECTIVE III: Metallurgical Manufacturing
Course
Number
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits
MT7LXX0 Light Metals and Alloys 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Near Net Forming 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Powder Metallurgy 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Thermo Mechanical Processing 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Material Aspects in Additive Manufacturing 3-0-0-0 3
(D) ELECTIVE IV: Physical Metallurgy
Course
Number
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits
MT7LXX0 Plastic Deformation and Microstructure Evolution 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Corrosion Engineering 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Introduction to Dislocations 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Structure-Property-Correlation 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Mechanical Behavior of Materials 3-0-2-0 4
MT7LXX1 Electron and Scanning Probe Microscopy 1-0-0-0 1
MT7LXX2 Light Microscopy and Spectroscopic Techniques 1-0-0-0 1
MT7LXX3 Diffraction and Thermal Analysis Techniques 1-0-0-0 1
MT7PXX4 Materials Characterization Laboratory 0-0-2-0 1
(E) ELECTIVE V: Functional Materials and Devices
Course
Number
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits
MT7LXX0 Ceramics 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Composites 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Polymers and their composites 3-0-0-0 3
MT7LXX0 Principles of Engineering Material Selection 3-0-0-0 3
DETAILED SYLLABUS FOR THE COMPULSORY COURSES
Title Metallurgical Thermodynamics and
Kinetics
Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–1–0 [4]
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. Provide a basis for describing and understanding the stability of various forms of
matter.
2. Provide a basis for predicting the properties of an equilibrated system as a function of
its content and characteristics.
Learning Outcomes
1. Establish the conditions for stability of a material and derive its properties.
2. Control the evolution of microstructures with respect to different parameters.
Course Content
Laws of thermodynamics and Chemical reactions (14 lectures)
First, second and third laws (3 lectures)
statistical interpretation of entropy (3 lectures)
Free energy functions and criteria for equilibrium (3 lectures)
reaction equilibrium, equilibrium constant; applications to materials and metallurgical
systems (5 lectures).
Thermodynamics of solutions and phase diagrams (14 lectures)
Ideal and non-ideal solutions, partial and molar quantities, quasi-chemical model and
regular solutions (3 lectures).
Phase rule and binary phase diagrams (2 lectures),
free energy composition diagrams (5 lectures)
phase equilibrium calculations. (4 lectures)
Thermodynamics of interfaces and kinetics (14 lectures)
Interfaces, surface tension and surface energy (3 lectures)
equilibrium at interfaces, nucleation (3 lectures),
coherency (1 lecture),
thermal activation, diffusion, concentration gradients, thermal gradients (3 lectures)
Fick’s laws, mechanisms of interface migration (3 lectures)
Text Books
1. Gaskell, D.R., Introduction to Metallurgical Thermodynamics, McGraw-Hill 1995.
2. Swalin, R. A., Thermodynamics of Solids, reprint Edition, Wiley, 1962.
3. Balluffi, R. W., Samuel, M. A., Carter, W. C., Kinetics of Materials, Wiley, 2005.
Self-Learning Material
1. Bird, R.B., Stewart, W.E. and Lightfoot, E.N., Transport Phenomena, Wiley, 1960.
2. Hillert, M., Phase Equilibria, Phase Diagrams and Phase Transformations Their
Thermodynamic Basis, Second edition, Cambridge University Press 2008.
Title Characterization of Minerals Metals
and Materials
Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objective
1. Understanding the instruments and methods for characterising different materials and
their properties.
Learning Outcomes
1. Basic working principles for various instruments.
2. Choice of characterization methods based on their analysis and performance.
Course Content
MTL7XX1: Electron and Scanning Probe Microscopy [1-0-0]
Introduction: Importance of Characterization of Materials, Structural and Functional
Characterizations, Review of Crystallography. (4 Lectures)
Electron Microscopies: Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) & Transmission Electron
Microscopy (TEM). (7 Lectures)
Scanning Probe Microscopy: Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy (SEM) & Atomic Force
Microscopy (AFM). (3 Lectures)
MTL7XX2: Light Microscopy and Spectroscopic Techniques [1-0-0]
Light Optical Microscopy: Polarization microscopy for minerals, Phase contrast
microscopy for metals, DIC Microscopy and Confocal and other special techniques for
polymers and biomaterials. (7 Lectures)
Spectroscopic characterization: UV-VIS-NIR, FTIR, Photoluminescence and Raman
Spectroscopy. (7 Lectures)
MTL7XX3: Diffraction and Thermal Analysis Techniques [1-0-0]
Diffraction Techniques: X-Ray Diffraction, Electron Diffraction. (10 Lectures)
Thermal Analysis: Thermal Mechanical Analysis (TMA), Differential Scanning
Calorimetric (DSC), Thermal Gravimetric Analysis (TGA), Differential Thermal Analysis
(DTA). (4 Lectures)
MTP7XX4: Materials Characterization Laboratory [0-0-2]
Calculation of thermodynamic parameters using DSC analysis; Functional group analysis
using FTIR; XRD Pattern Indexing; Lattice parameter and crystallite size
calculation; Electron Diffraction Pattern Indexing; Image Analysis.
Text Books
1. Zhang, S., Li, L. and Kumar, A., Materials Characterization Techniques, CRC Press, 2008.
Self-Learning Material
1. Evans, C., Brundle. R. and Wilson, Encyclopaedia of Materials Characterization: Surfaces,
Interfaces, Thin Films (Materials Characterization Series), Butterworth-Heinemann, 1992.
2. Kaufmann, E.N., Characterization of Materials, 3 Volume Set, 2nd Edition, Wiley, 2012.
Online Course Material
1. Shankaran, S., Materials Characterization, Department of Metallurgical & Materials
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, NPTEL
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106034/
2. Biswas, K. and Gurao, N.P., Advanced Characterization Techniques, Department of
Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, NPTEL
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104004
Title Computational Materials
Engineering
Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials
Engineering
L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objective
1. To understand different modeling and simulations techniques for studying various
materials.
Learning Outcomes
1. Student will be able to understand and use the first-principles calculations
2. Student will be able to understand and run the Molecular dynamics simulations
Course Content
First-principles calculations (28 lectures)
Introduction, Density functional theory (5 lectures), Kohn-Sham method (4 lectures),
Exchange-correlation energy (2 lectures), Crystal structure (1 lecture), Pseudopotential approach
(2 lectures), Bloch’s theorem (2 lectures), Structure relaxation (1 lecture), Electronic band
structure and density of states (3 lectures), Fermi-Dirac distribution (1 lecture), Smearing
methods (1 lectures), Lattice dynamics (1 lectures), Phonon dispersion relations (1 lecture),
Force constants (3 lectures), Vibrational thermodynamics (1 lecture)
Molecular dynamics simulations (14 lectures)
Introduction (1 lecture), Potentials (2 lectures), Newtons Equation of motion (2 lectures),
Algorithms (2 lectures), Simulation parameters (2 lectures), Types of ensembles (2 lectures),
Temperature control and data analysis (3 lectures)
Laboratory Experiments
Preparation of input files, Technical parameters optimization, Structure optimization, Electronic
band structure calculation, density of states calculation, metallic system simulation, phonon band
structure calculation
Text Books
1. Lee, J., Computational Materials Science: An Introduction, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 2016.
2. Sholl, D. S., and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, 1st
Edition, Wiley, 2009.
3. Dove, M.T., Introduction to Lattice Dynamics, 1st Edition, Cambridge University Press,
1993.
Self-Learning Material
1. Parr, R.G., and Yang, W., Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules, 1st Edition,
Oxford Science Publications, 1994.
2. Raabe, D., Computational Materials Science: The Simulation of Materials, Microstructures
and Properties, Wiley VCH, 1998.
Online Course Materials
MIT open courseware: Gerbrand Ceder, and Nicola Marzari. 3.320 Atomistic Computer
Modeling of Materials (SMA 5107). Spring 2005. Massachusetts Institute of Technology:
MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA
Title Phase Transformations in Solids Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objective
1. Understanding the correlation between the phase diagram and chemical
thermodynamics for alloy design.
Learning Outcomes
1. Ability to construct multicomponent phase diagrams using computational
thermodynamic approach.
2. Understand the variation of properties with the microstructure evolution during
phase transformations.
Course Content
Thermodynamics and kinetics: free energy, order of transformation, driving force,
homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation, growth kinetics, coarsening,
precipitation. (8 Lectures)
Interfaces: atomic mechanisms of diffusion, activation energy, interfacial free energy,
types of interface (coherent, semi-coherent and incoherent interfaces), interface
migration. (6 Lectures)
Austenite, transformation of austenite, TTT diagram, eutectoid transformation, pearlite
and bainite transformation. (8 Lectures)
Martensite transformation: characteristics and nature, morphology, crystallography,
theory of nucleation and growth, and pre-martensite phenomena, martensitic
transformation in steel. (6 Lectures)
Precipitation hardening and spinodal decomposition: Solutionising and ageing, GP
zones, intermediate phases and structural changes, spinodal decomposition. (8
Lectures)
Order-disorder transformation: common structures in ordered alloys, variation of order
with temperature; determination of degree of ordering, effect of ordering on
properties, applications. (6 Lectures)
Laboratory Experiments: Hardenability measurement, Solid-liquid transformation,
Activation energy calculation, Heat treatment of ferrous metals, Precipitation
Hardening, TTT Diagram construction.
Text Books
1. Raghavan, V., Solid State Phase Transformations, 1st edition, Prentice Hall India,
1987.
2. Porter, D.A., Easterling, K. E., and Sherif, M.Y., Phase Transformation in Metals and
Alloys, 3rd edition, CRC Press, 2009.
3. Abbaschian, R., Abbaschian, L., and Reed-Hill, R. E., Physical Metallurgy Principles,
4th edition, Cengate Learning, 2009.
Self-Learning Material
1. Khachaturyan, A.G., Theory of Structural Transformations in Solids, 1st edition,
Dover publications, 2008.
2. Avner, S.H., Introduction to Physical Metallurgy, 2nd edition, McGraw Hill
Education, 2017.
Online Course Material:
1. Gururajan, M.P., Phase Transformations and Heat Treatment, Indian Institute of
Technology Bombay, NPTEL http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113101003/
SYLLABUS FOR ELECTIVES OFFERED BY
DEPARTMENT OF METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS ENGINEERING:
Title Alloy Design : Computational Thermodynamic
Approach
Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. Understanding the correlation between the phase diagram and chemical
thermodynamics for alloy design.
Learning Outcomes
1. Ability to construct multicomponent phase diagrams using computational
thermodynamic approach.
2. Ability to learn the assessment of binary phase diagram using PARROT module.
Contents
1. Thermodynamics of Solution: Ideal solution, configurational entropy, regular solution
model, chemical potential, free energy composition diagram, evolution of phase
diagrams quasichemical theory, Sub regular solution model. (8 Lectures)
2. Alloy Design of multicomponent system: Redlitch-kister polynomial, Muggianu and
kohler extrapolation. Crystallography in thermodynamics, Order and disorder structure,
antisite defect and vacancies. Compound energy formalism. Modeling of Interstitial and
substitutional phases, stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric compounds. (14 Lectures)
3. CALPHAD modeling of non - metallic system. Cluster variance model. (6 Lectures)
4. Calculation of thermodynamic parameters: First principle calculation, Semi-empirical-
Miedema approach. Calorimetric measurement, electrochemical measurement,
Diffusion couple method. (8 Lectures)
5. Assessment of thermodynamic system: Optimization of binary isomorphous and
eutectic phase diagram using PARROT module. (6)
Lab Experiments
Construction of equilibrium and non-equilibrium phase diagram, Vertical section phase
diagram and Property diagram for multi-component alloys, Scheil and equilibrium
solidification simulation, Liquidus projections and monovariant reactions in ternary phase
equilibria, Creation of user defined thermodynamic database for Solid solution,
Stoichiometric compounds, non-stoichiometric compounds.
Textbooks
1. Saunders and Miodownik, CALPHAD (Calculation of Phase Diagrams): A
Comprehensive Guide, 1st Edition, Pergamman Press, 1998
2. Hans Lukas, Suzana G. Fries, Bo Sundman, Computational Thermodynamics: The
Calphad Method, Cambridge University Press, 2007
Self-Learning Material
1. Porter, D.A., Easterling, K. E., and Sherif, M.Y., Phase Transformation in Metals and
Alloys, 3rd edition, CRC Press, 2009
Online Course Materials
1. Murty, B.S., Advanced Metallurgical Thermodynamics, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106031/.
Title Mineral Engineering Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Pre-requisite
Objective
1. To introduce the importance of mineral processing and engineering.
Learning Outcomes
1. Ability to engineer selective mineral processing.
Course Content
1. Introduction to Mineral Geology: Geological formation of minerals. Classification and
identification of minerals. (4 lectures)
2. Introduction to Mineral Engineering: Various ore dressing methods, their principles and
applications. Role of cavitation, Gravity separation, Heap bioleaching, Fundamentals and
Plant practices of beneficiation, Surface properties and selective flotation, Mineral
Liberation: Random and non-random breakage. (10 lectures)
3. Mineral Processing: Solid Liquid and Liquid-Liquid processing methods, gas phase
extraction. (8 lectures)
4. Metal Recovery: Phase extraction in metal recovery, Recovery of metals from slag waste,
Heavy metal removal mechanism. (8 lectures)
5. Mineral Processing of special materials (from brine and mineral resources), rare earths,
vanadium, etc.(8 lectures)
6. Characterization techniques in mineral processing: Rheology studies for flotation slurries.
7. Simulation and control of column flotation.(4 lectures)
Text Books
1. Wills, B.A. and Napier-Munn, T.J., Mineral Processing Technology, Elsevier Science &
Technology Books, 7th Edition, 2006.
2. Subbarao, D.V., Mineral Beneficiation: A Concise Basic Course, CRC Press, 2011.
3. Flemings, M.C., Solidification Processing, McGraw Hill, 1974.
4. German, R. M., Powder Metallurgy & Particulate Materials Processing, Metal Powder
Industry, 2005.
Title Iron and Steel Making Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objective
1. Introduce principles of iron and steel making and the field of special steels.
Learning Outcomes
1. Understand the basics of metallurgy involved in iron and steel making.
2. Describe the overview of processing of iron and steel.
Course Content
1. Iron making: sequence of operations, raw materials preparation, thermodynamics and
kinetics. (6 lectures)
2. Blast furnace: design, internal zones and gas flow, productivity, fuel efficiency, products.
(4 lectures)
3. Sponge Iron making and smelting reduction. (4 lectures)
4. Reactions in steel making: removal of C, Si, Mn, P and S. (8 lectures)
5. Design and selection of steel making slags and refractories. (8 lectures)
6. Steel making: basic oxygen furnace processes, electric arc furnace and induction furnace
steel making. (8 lectures)
7. Secondary steel making processes, alloy steel making. (2 lectures)
8. Special steels and their applications. (2 lectures)
Text Books
1. Ghosh, A., and Chatterji, A., Ironmaking and Steelmaking: Theory and Practice, Prentice-
Hall (India), 2008.
2. Chatterjee, A., Beyond the Blast Furnace, CRC Press, 1994.
3. Peacey, J.C. and W. G. Davenport, The Iron Blast Furnace: Theory and Practice,
Pergamon, 1979.
Self-Learning materials
1. Making, Shaping and Treating of Steel, Vol.1: Iron Making, 11th Ed., AISE Steel
Foundation, 1999.
Online Course Materials
1. Koria, S.C., Steel Making, IIT Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104059
Title Solidification Processing Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objective:
1. Treat the fundamentals of liquid to solid transformation and practical implication to
practice.
2. Processes such as crystal growth, interface stability, splat cooling, ingot casting shape
casting will be dealt with paying particular emphasis to fundamentals of mass transport,
heat flow and interface kinetics.
Learning Outcomes
1. Build up knowledge on fundamentals of solidification of metals and alloys and correlating
with various casting processes.
Course Content
1. Casting and related phenomena: Thermodynamics of nucleation and growth phenomena,
crystal growth, grain refinement. (4 lectures)
2. Solidification process: heat flow, plain front solidification, cellular solidification,
constitutional supercooling, , formation of dendrites, eutectic solidification, monotectic
solidification, peritectic growth, effect of pressure on solidification. (14 lectures)
3. Gating system: fluid flow, gating and riser design, Adams’ and Caine’s riser design,
fluidity. (8 lectures)
4. Solidification during welding, Directional solidification and single crystal fabrication. (8
lectures)
5. Recent developments: interface kinetics, interface dynamics, phase selection,
microstructure selection. Effect of vibration. Theory convection effects. Multicomponent
alloys and numerical techniques. (8 lectures)
Text Books
1. Flemings, M.C., Solidification Processing, Mcgraw-Hill Book Company, 1974.
2. Campbell, J., Complete casting Handbook: Metal Casting Processes, Metallurgy,
Techniques and Design, Butterworth-Heinmann, 2015.
1. Minkoff, I., Solidification and Cast Structure, Wiley, 1986.
Title Industrial Waste: Control and Utilization Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objective:
1. Classification of waste products and technological management for their environmental
sustainability
Learning Outcomes
1. Differentiate among the different kinds of waste.
2. Find optimum method for waste management.
Course Content
1. Types of waste: Solid, Liquid and gaseous (4 lectures)
2. Sources of waste: Industrial: Metallurgical, Pharma & Chemical, Electronic, Biological (8
lectures)
3. Recycling of waste: Metal Scrap remelting, Extraction of precious and harmful metals
from electronic waste, (8 lectures)
4. Waste to wealth: Waste for energy, Production of commercial nano particles from waste
(8 lectures)
5. Treatment Storage and Disposal of waste: Long term storage Land filling, incineration;
Short term storage and container materials (8 lectures)
6. Case Studies: Nuclear industry, Biomedical industry, Steel industry (6 lectures)
Text Books
1. Pichtel, J., Waste Management Practices: Municipal, Hazardous, and Industrial, 2nd
edition, CRC Press, 2014.
2. Choudhary, C. K., Waste management and bioremediation, Oxford Book Company, 2012.
Self-Learning materials
1. Wong, J. W. C, Surampalli, R. Y., Zhang, T. C., Tyagi, R. D., Selvan, A., Sustainable Solid
Waste Management, American Society of Civil Engineers, 2016.
2. Ojovan, M. I., Handbook of Advanced Radioactive Waste Conditioning Technologies,
Woodhead Publishing, 2011.
Online Course Material
1. Dubey, B. K., Electronic Waste Management - Issues and Challenges, Division of
Environmental Engineering and Management at Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, NPTEL, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ce07/preview
2. Dubey, B. K., Integrated Waste Management for a Smart City, Division of Environmental
Engineering and Management at Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, NPTEL,
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ce20/preview
3. Ramachandra, T. V., Municipal Solid Waste Management, Centre for Ecological Sciences,
Indian Institute of Science, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/120108005/2#
Title Light Metal and Alloys Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objective
1. Introduce the prospect of competitive structural materials with high specific strength.
Learning Outcomes
1. Appreciate the role of light metals for energy savings in different applications/sectors.
Course Content
1. Introduction: Importance of light metals, overview of light metals production. (4 lectures)
2. Techniques for melting and solidification: solidification, grain refinement, casting
processes. (6 lectures)
3. Heat treatment: grain refinement, strengthening by solid solution, precipitation
hardening, dispersion of second phase particles. (8 lectures)
4. Alloy designations and properties: specific alloy systems ((a) Al-alloys, (b) Mg-alloys, (c)
Ti-alloys). (8 lectures)
5. Manufacturing and applications: aerospace, biomedical, automobile, domestic appliances.
(8 lectures)
6. Novel processing methods: composites, metallic foams, rapid solidification, Quasi
crystals, amorphous alloys, mechanical alloying, physical vapor deposition, additive
manufacturing. (8 lectures)
Text Books
1. Polmear, I. J., St. John, D., Nie, J. F., Qian, M, Light Alloys, 5th edition, Elsevier 2016.
2. Brandes E. A. and Brook G. B., Smithells Light Metals Handbook, Elsevier, 1998.
Self-Learning materials
1. Totten G.E. and Mackenzie D.S., Handbook of Aluminum Vol. 1: Physical Metallurgy and
Processes, CRC Press 2003.
2. Friedrich H.E., and Mordike B.L., Magnesium Technology, Springer, 2004.
3. Lütjering G., Williams J.C., Titanium, 2nd edition, Springer, 2007.
Title Near Net Forming Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective
1. Industrial processing technique of near net forming for their applications.
Learning Outcomes
1. Development of methods used by forging industry.
Course Content
1. Introduction and Application of Near net forming.(2 lectures)
2. Manufacturing:
a. Casting: Robo-casting, additive manufacturing by 3D printing, investment casting,
near net casting, direct coagulation casting, low pressure injection molding, state
of the art casting & foam casting. (4 lectures)
b. Pressure less spark plasma sintering, miniature components sintering near net
rolling of soft parts, cross wedge rolling process. (3 lectures)
c. Spray forming: electric arc spray forming, spraying-conform process & thermal
spray forming. (3 lectures)
d. Extrusion, infiltration, compound forming, precise shape forming, isothermal and
near isothermal processing, friction stir forming & micro forming. (3 lectures)
e. Thixo Methods: semi-solid processing, thixo-forming, thixo extrusion, shape
forming from colloidal processing, polymer impregnation and pyrolysis. (4
lectures)
f. Powder methods: Powder technology & die pressing powders. (3 Lectures)
g. Other methods: Net shaped heaping, laser metal deposition, warm spinning of
cast iron, diffusion bonding, explosive welding, micro-forming, micro deep
drawing, thermo hydrogen processing, spinning, shear forming and flow forming &
bulge forming. (8 lectures)
3. Materials: Bimetal, Ti and its composites, Al alloys (Al-Mg, Al-Ti, Al-Si), Ni super alloys,
intermetallic porous materials, SiC, etc for different applications. (6 lectures)
4. Biological applications: Clinical Therapeutics and Health Monitoring. (3 lectures)
5. Engineering applications: Turbine Blade, Thermal coatings and Hollow turbine blades.(3
lectures)
Text Books
1. Near Net Shape Manufacturing of Metal: A Review of Approaches and Their Evolutions,
Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers Part B Journal of Engineering
Manufacture, 2017.
2. Grant, P. S., Spray forming, Progress in Materials Science, 39, 497-545, 1995.
3. Waterman, N. A., The Selection of Materials, Engineering Design, 1982.
Further reading
1. G Giuliano, G., Superplastic Forming of Advanced Metallic Materials, Woodhead, 2011.
Course Title Powder Metallurgy Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective
1. Understand recent concepts in powder metallurgy and product design parameters.
Learning Outcomes
1. Student will be able to conceptualize the powerful tool of powder metallurgy and directly
apply to contemporary products.
Course Content
1. Introduction and application of powder metallurgy. (2 lectures)
2. Powder production: (8 lectures)
a. Different production methods namely physical, chemical, mechanical methods.
b. Single fluid atomization: Rotating electrode atomization, roller atomization,
rotating disc atomization.
c. Two fluid atomization: Gas atomization, water atomization, oil atomization etc.
d. Reduction methods: Carbonyl process, hydride-dehydride process & electrolytic
method.
3. Powder characterization: (10 lectures)
Particle size and Size distribution using sieving, sedimentation method, Andreasen pipette
method, size distribution functions like normal distribution, log-normal distribution,
Rosin-Rammler distribution, particle shape, shape factors, specific surface area of
powder, flow rate, tap density, apparent density, compressibility, pyrophoricity,
explosivity and toxicity of powder
4. Powder compaction: (4 lectures)
Die compaction, isostatic pressing, single level and multi-level part compaction,
repressing, plane strain compression, powder forging, powder roll compaction and
powder extrusion
5. Sintering: (10 lectures)
Theory of sintering practice, types of furnaces and atmosphere control, activated
sintering techniques, post-sintering treatments; industrial sintering practice for ferrous
and non-ferrous products.
6. Applications of powder metallurgy: Self-lubricating bearing, magnetic materials, tungsten
carbide tool bits, bearing materials, dispersion strengthen materials for high temperature
applications and manufacture of diamond based cutting tools, brake pads, etc. (8
lectures)
Text Books
1. German, R.M., Powder Metallurgy and Particulate Materials Processing, MPIF, 2005Sands,
R.L. and Shakespeare C.R., Powder Metallurgy Practice and Applications, Newness
2. Publications, 1970.
3. Upadhyaya, G.S., Powder Metallurgy Technology, Cambridge Press 1996.
Self-Learning materials
1. Masuda, H., Powder Technology Handbook, Taylor & Francis 2006.Powder Metal
Technologies and Applications, Metals Handbook, Vol.7, 9th edition, ASM, 1989.
Online Course Material
1. Schuh, C., 3.044 Materials Processing. Spring 2013. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-
NC-SA.
Course Title Thermo Mechanical Processing Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective
1. Methodology for developing varying microstructures to meet a range of properties for
industrial applications.
Learning Outcomes
2. Development of methods using mechanical working and heat treatment effectively.
Course Content
3. Introduction: microstructure control, application of heat treatment. (4 lectures)
4. Effect of mechanical working: low temperature and dislocation structure, high
temperature deformation and sub-structure evolution, concurrent relationship between
flow properties and microstructure evolution. (12 lectures)
5. Principles of thermo mechanical processing (TMP): single phase versus multi-phase
materials, sequencing of mechanical working and heat treatment, concurrent
manipulation of microstructure. (14 lectures)
6. Application of TMP: deformation induced phase transformation, steel for car body, dual
phase and TRIP steel, controlled rolling of HSLA steel, electrical steel, patented steel
wire, aerospace applications (Aluminium, Special alloys). (12 lectures)
Text Books
1. Krauss G., Steels: Processing, Structure and Performance, ASM Int'l Materials Park,
2005.
2. Verlinden, B., Driver, J., Samajdar, I. and Doherty, R. D., Thermo-Mechanical
Processing of Metallic Materials, Elsevier, 2007.
3. Krauss G., Principles of Heat Treatment of Steel, ASM Intl, 1989.
Suggested References
1. Sakaia, T., Belyakov, A., Kaibyshev, R., Miura, H. and Jonas, J.J., Dynamic and Post-
Dynamic Recrystallization Under Hot, Cold and Severe Plastic Deformation Conditions,
Progress in Materials Science 60, 130-207 (2014).
2. Sherby, O.D., Wadsworth, J., and Nieh, T. G., Superplasticity in Metals and Ceramics,
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Web Resources
1. Shekhar, S. and Gaur, A. Fundamentals of Materials Processing (Part- II) Department
of Materials Science and Engineering Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, NPTEL
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104075/
2. Gururajan, M.P. , Phase Transformations and Heat Treatment, Department of
Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science, Indian Institute of Technology,
Bombay, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113101003/
3. Schuh, C., 3.044 Materials Processing. Spring 2013. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology: MIT Open Course Ware, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons
BY-NC-SA.
Course Title Material Aspects in Additive Manufacturing Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective:
1. Understanding the metallurgical and materials engineering aspects of additive
manufacturing.
Learning Outcomes
2. Ability to learn the additive manufacturing process physics to design and fabricate the 3D
parts with desired structure and property.
3. Ability to monitor and control the additive manufacturing (AM) process.
Course Content
1. AM Overview : Direct Digital Manufacturing and their importance. Different AM processes
and relevant Process Physics. (5 Lectures)
2. AM Powder Production and Characterization: Different Mechanical and Chemical methods,
Atomization of Powder, other emerging processes. Performance Evaluation of different
processes. Chemical and Microstructural Characterization of powders. (6 Lectures)
3. Transport phenomena model for AM process: Temperature, Fluid Flow and Composition.
(6 Lectures)
4. Metallurgical Aspects of AM process: Solidification. Texture. Non-equilibrium
Microstructure. Residual stress. Process-Structure-Property relationship (8 Lectures)
5. Process monitoring and Control for AM: Defects, Geometry, Temperature, Composition
and Phase Transformation (6 Lectures)
6. Post processing of AM parts: Support material removal. Machining. Heat Treatment. Hot
Isostatic Processing. Hybrid manufacturing. (6 Lectures)
7. Applications of Additive Manufacturing: Additive Manufacturing in Aerospace, Automotive,
Electronics industries and Biomedical applications. (5 Lectures)
Text Books
1. Gibson I., David W. R., Stucker B., Additive Manufacturing Technologies: 3D Printing,
Rapid Prototyping, and Direct Digital Manufacturing, Springer, 2nd Ed. (2015).
2. Chua C.K., Leong K.F. and Lim C.S., Rapid prototyping: Principles and applications, 3rd
Edition, World Scientific, 2010.
Self-learning Materials
1. Sands, R.L. and Shakespeare C.R., Powder Metallurgy Practice and Applications, Newness
Publications, 1970.
2. Majumdar J.D. and Manna I., Laser-assisted fabrication of materials, Springer Series in
Material Science, 2013.
Title Plastic Deformation and Microstructure Evolution Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objective
1. Provide background to assess the properties and mechanisms which help in optimizing
the plastic deformation of metals over a wide range of service conditions.
Learning Outcomes
1. To provide basic understanding of the reasons that make the metal exhibit variation in
deformation and strength for metal forming and applications.
2. Imparting knowledge in metals plastic deformation with respect to their microstructure
evolution.
Course Content
1. Deformation behaviour: single crystal vs polycrystalline material, stress-strain curves,
geometrically necessary dislocations. (4 lectures)
2. Effect of microstructure on flow properties: Hall-Petch relationship, role of grain-
boundaries. (6 lectures)
3. Strengthening mechanisms: solid solution strengthening, precipitation hardening,
grain refinement. (10 lectures)
4. High Temperature deformation: creep, super-plasticity, dynamic recovery,
recrystallization and grain growth. (12 lectures)
5. Deformation behaviour of ceramics and polymeric materials: ductile ceramics,
plasticity in specific ceramics, dislocation activity in ceramics, non-crystalline polymer,
crystalline polymer, structure-property relationship in polymers. (10 lectures)
Text Books
1. Dieter, G. E., Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company, 1986.
2. Courtney, T. H., Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, 2nd Edition, Waveland Pr. Inc.,
2005.
3. Shetty, M.N., Dislocations and Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, Prentice Hall India
Learning Private Limited, 2013.
Suggested References
1. Honeycombe, R.W.K., The Plastic Deformation of Metals, 2nd Edition, ASM, 1984.
2. Meyers, M. A. and Chawla, K. K., Mechanical Metallurgy, Principles and Applications,
Prentice-Hall, Inc 1984.
Online Course Material
1. Bauri, R., Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, Department of
Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, NPTEL
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106032/
2. Sundararaman, M., Defects in Materials, Department of Metallurgical and Materials
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, NPTEL
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106075/
3. Krystyn van Vliet. 3.22 Mechanical Behavior of Materials. Spring 2008. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative
Commons BY-NC-SA.
Title Corrosion Engineering Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objective
1. Introduce the principles of corrosion and its prevention methods.
Learning Outcomes
1. Understand the reasons for material degradation under various environments.
2. Know the methods to minimize/prevent the loss due to corrosion.
Course Content
1. Thermodynamics and Kinetics: Causes of corrosion, electrochemical mechanisms,
corrosion tendency, electrode potentials, The Nernst Equation, Pourbaix Diagrams,
Polarization and Passivation. (8 Lectures)
2. Forms of corrosion: Galvanic corrosion, crevice corrosion, pitting corrosion, intergranular
corrosion, selective leaching, erosion corrosion, stress corrosion, hydrogen damage. (10
Lectures)
3. Prevention methods: Materials selection, alteration of environment, design, cathodic and
anodic protection, coatings. (6 Lectures)
4. Corrosion in common metals and alloys: Iron and steel, Copper and Copper alloys,
Aluminum and Aluminum alloys, Magnesium and Magnesium alloys, Titanium and
Titanium alloys.(6 Lectures)
5. Corrosion monitoring : Destructive and Non-destructive methods (6 Lectures)
6. High temperature oxidation: Electrochemical and morphological aspects, oxide defect
structure, kinetics, effects of alloying, high temperature materials. (6 Lectures)
Text Books
1. Fontana, M.G., Corrosion Engineering, 3rd edition, McGraw Hill, 2017.
2. Revie, W.R. and Uhlig, H.H., Corrosion and Corrosion Control, 4th edition, Wiley, 2008.
Online Course Material
1. Natarajan, K.A., Advances in Corrosion Engineering, IISc Bangalore, NPTEL,
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113108051/
Title Introduction to Dislocations Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objective
1. Give a broad overview of dislocations and their interactions in crystals.
Learning Outcomes
1. The student would know the role of dislocations on properties of materials.
Course Content
1. Defects in crystals: types of defects, types of dislocations, methods for observation of
dislocations. (4 lectures)
2. Movement of dislocations: slip and slip plane, cross-slip and climb. (4 lectures)
3. Elastic properties of dislocations: forces on dislocations, stress field and strain energy of
a dislocation. (10 lectures)
4. Dislocations in different crystals: dislocations in FCC, HCP and BCC metals, and other
periodic systems. (10 lectures)
5. Intersection of dislocations: Jogs, movement of dislocations containing elementary jog,
superjogs, intersection of extended dislocations and extended jogs. (4 lectures)
6. Multiplication of dislocations: nucleation, Frank-Reed sources, multiple cross-glide, climb
& grain boundary. (5 lectures)
7. Dislocation arrays and crystal boundaries: dislocation boundaries, low-angle boundaries &
steps in interfaces. (5 lectures)
Text Books
1. Hull, D. and Bacon, D. J., Introduction to Dislocations, 4th edition, Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2001.
2. Hirth, J. P., and Lothe, J. L., Theory of Dislocations, 2nd edition, Krieger, 1982.
Course Title Structure-Property-Correlation Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective
1. To understand the structure-property-correlation in materials.
Learning Outcomes
1. To design materials based on their structure for various properties.
Course Content
1. Structure sensitive properties: classification, dimensional range of various structural
features, interrelationship between different structural parameters, effect of structure on
properties. (10 lectures)
2. Dynamics of microstructure evolution: evolution at different length scales and its effect
on properties, factors influencing the properties, concurrent microstructure evolution and
properties. (12 lectures)
3. Application of structure-property correlation: influence of different service conditions,
effect of alloys systems. (10 lectures)
4. Computational approaches: constitutive relationship under dynamic conditions, evolution
of concurrent structure and properties.(10 lectures)
Text Books
1. Meyers, M. A., Chawla, K. K., Mechanical Metallurgy: Principles and Application, Prentice-
Hall, 1983.
2. Mugharabi, H., Plastic Deformation and Fracture of Materials, VCH Weinheim, 1993.
3. Krauss, G., Steels: Processing, Structure, and Performance, 2nd Edition, ASM
International, 2005.
Suggested Reference
1. Krauss, G., Deformation, Processing, and Structure, ASM Materials Science Seminar,
American Society for Metals, 1984.
Title Mechanical Behavior of Materials Number MT7XX
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P-D
[C]
3–0–2-0 [4]
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. To provide background on the mechanisms of deformation in engineering materials,
and on the evolution of material microstructure when subjected to mechanical stress
during materials processing and engineering applications
Learning Outcomes
1. Ability to design materials with improved mechanical properties and identify failure
mechanisms in materials for engineering applications
2. To measure important mechanical properties and correlate with the microstructure
Contents
Continuum Theory of Deformation: 3D-state of stress and strain, Mohr’s Circle, Generalized
Hooke’s Law and introductory theory of elasticity, stress and strain invariants, Yield Criteria,
Yield surface and normality (6 lectures)
Defects in Crystals: Vacancies and interstitials, edge, screw and mixed dislocations, Burgers
vector, slip, cross-slip and climb, stress fields around edge and screw dislocations, strain
energy of dislocations, dislocation-dislocation interaction: Peach-Koehler force on
dislocation, image forces, dislocations in different crystal structures (10 lectures)
Twinning in Crystalline Solids: Deformation twinning, geometry of twin formation, twin shape,
stress requirement for twinning, twinning in HCP, BCC, and FCC crystals (4 lectures)
Fracture and Toughening Mechanisms Fatigue: theoretical fracture strength of a material and
Griffith’s Law, modes of fracture, fracture toughness, G and R-curve, brittle and ductile
fracture, toughening mechanisms in metals, ceramics, and polymers (8 lectures)
Fatigue and Creep: Introduction to fatigue, stress and strain-life approach, cyclic stress-strain
curve, fatigue crack propagation, high temperature deformation, fatigue-creep interaction
(8 lectures)
Deformation of Polymers: Elasticity in dilute and semi-dilute polymer networks, nonlinear
elastic deformation, rubber elasticity: Mooney-Rivlin and Ogden models (6 lectures)
Laboratory Experiments
Measurement of uniaxial monotonic stress-strain response of metals, ceramics, and
polymers, Measurement of hardness via spherical and Vickers indentation and correlation
with yield strength for ductile and brittle materials, The effect of grain size on mechanical
properties, The effects of strain rate and temperature on yield strength, Recrystallization of
cold rolled metals, Measurement of impact fracture toughness using Charpy/Izod impact test,
Fracture surface interpretation, Creep of a 60%Sn-40%Pb Solder wire at room temperature.
Text Books
1. Dieter, G.E. (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company.
2. Courtney, T. H., (2005), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, 2nd Edition, Waveland
Press Inc.
3. Shetty, M. N., (2013), Dislocations and Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Prentice Hall
India Learning Private Limited
Self-Learning Materials
1. Hertzberg, R.W., (1976), Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering
Materials, John Wiley and Sons
2. McClintock,F.A., and Argon,A.S., (1966), Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Addison-
Wesley.
Title Ceramics Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective
1. Exposure to range of ceramics and their properties based on structure.
Learning Outcome
1. Selection of ceramics for various applications.
Course content
1. Introduction to ceramics: oxide and non-oxide ceramics, their chemical formulae, crystal
and defect structures, non-stoichiometry and typical properties. (8 Lectures)
2. Ceramics with special properties: ductile ceramics, transparent ceramics, single crystal,
thick and thin film ceramics, porous ceramics and ceramic membrane. (10 Lectures)
3. Properties of ceramics: physical, chemical, mechanical, electrical and optical. (8 Lectures)
4. Application of different types of ceramics in various industries. (8 Lectures)
5. Exotic ceramics: functionally graded, smart/intelligent, bio-mimetic and nano-ceramics.
(8 Lectures)
Text Books
1. Norton, F.H., Elements of Ceramics, Addison-Wesley Press, 1952.
2. Barsoum, M. and Barsoum, M.W., Fundamentals of Ceramics, CRC Press, 2002.
3. Kingery, W.D., Bowen, H.K., and Uhlmann, D.R., Introduction to Ceramics, 2nd Ed., 1976.
Title Composites Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective
1. To provide comprehensive background on the processing, properties, and mechanics of
deformation of composite materials for engineering applications
Learning Outcome
1. Design and selection of composites for specific applications.
Course content
1. Introduction and classification of composites: Composites, matrix, reinforcements metal
matrix composites, polymer matrix composites, ceramic matrix composites (6 Lectures)
2. Manufacturing of Composite Materials: Manufacturing techniques, Defects in
manufactured composites (4 Lectures)
3. Macro and micromechanics of a lamina: stress-strain relations for anisotropic and
orthotropic materials, lamina in an arbitrary orientation, strengths of an orthotropic
lamina, mechanics of materials approach to stiffness and strength, elasticity approach to
stiffness (9 Lectures)
4. Macromechanics of a laminate: stress-strain relations for a laminate, in-plane and
flexural modulus of a laminate, strength of laminates (9 Lectures)
5. Fracture and Toughening of Composites: fracture processes in composites, toughening
mechanisms in fibre reinforced plastics and ceramic-matrix composites (6 Lectures)
6. Designing of Composites: Selection of matrix and reinforcement, Wettability and role of
interface (4 Lectures)
7. Applications of different types of composites in various industries and Emerging trends (4
Lectures)
Text Books
1. Barbero, E.J., Introduction to Composite Materials Design, Second Edition, CRC Press,
2011.
2. Kar, K. K., Composite Materials: Processing, Applications, Characterizations, Springer,
2017.
Course Title Polymers and Their Composites Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective
1. Introduce students to the wide range of polymers and their possible combinations with
other materials for getting desired properties.
Learning Outcomes
1. The student will be able to apply the properties of polymers and their composites to
construction, transport and storage industries.
Course Content
1. Introduction: Classification and synthesis of polymers Basic definitions and nomenclature,
molar mass and degree of polymerization, synthesis, glass transition temperature and
crystallinity in polymers, structure and its relation to thermal, chemical, electrical and
optical properties. (8 Lectures)
2. Mechanical and thermo mechanical characteristics: General characteristics, viscoelasticity,
deformation behavior of elastomers, deformation mechanisms, fractures, and toughened
polymers. (8 Lectures)
3. Polymer processing, characterization and applications: Introduction, plastics, elastomers and
fibers, compounding and processing techniques, practical aspects of polymer blending,
standards and engineering applications of polymers. (8 Lectures)
4. Polymer composites and their applications (2 Lectures)
5. Carbon nanomaterials and synthesis: C-C bonding, types of carbon fullerenes, crystal
structure of selected carbon nanomaterials: CNT, graphene, nano crystalline diamond,
synthesis by arc discharge, thermal CVD, microwave plasma CVD, Laser ablation; growth
mechanism; special synthesis techniques- vertical aligned growth of CNT, selective area
growth of CNT, single walled CNT growth, large area graphene synthesis, nano-patterning on
graphene (16 Lectures)
Text Books
1. Young, R.J., and Peter A. Lovell, Introduction to Polymers, 3rd revised edition, CRC Press,
2011.
2. Rudin, A., The Elements of Polymer Science and Engineering, 3rd edition, Academic Press,
2012.
3. Koo, J.H., Polymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Characterization, and Applications,
McGraw-Hill, 2010.
Online Course Material
1. Adhikari, B., Science and Technology of Polymers, Materials Science Centre, Indian
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028/
2. Garg, A., Electro Ceramics, Department of Materials science and Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology Kanpur, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104005/
Course Title Principles of Engineering Material Selection Number MT7LXX0
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objective:
1. Develop comprehensive knowledge on the procedure for selection of materials for a wide
range of products in engineering applications.
Learning Outcomes
1. Relationship between material properties with product and component design.
2. The methodology of materials selection, use of computer-aided selection and material data
and knowledge sources and their usefulness in industry.
Course Content
1. Importance of materials: Crystal structure, bonding, processes, and mechanical factors in
construction/design. Diffusion in materials and interpretation of phase diagrams. (6
Lectures)
2. Selection of materials for a specific application depending on the property and performance
using CES Selector for materials selection: A generalized material selection strategy will be
introduced together with use of material property charts, computer-aided selection, and
case studies. (8 Lectures)
3. Finding and understanding structured information on materials and processes for material
selection: How to screen information on materials and arrive at a conclusion? How to
create hybrid materials with combined properties of two or three materials? (10 Lectures)
4. Component/structural failures: Fracture, fatigue, creep, embrittlement, corrosion, etc.
Detailed survey of typical real life examples of failures from different applications –
lectures and videos. (10 Lectures)
5. Applications in technological sectors: Bio-medical, building, high temperature, industrial
applications, micro-electronics, packaging, transportation, etc. (8 Lectures)
Text Books
1. Ashby, M.F., Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, 4th Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann,
2010.
2. Callister, W. D., Materials Science and Engineering- An Introduction, John Wiley & Sons,
1985.
Suggested References
1. Shackelford, J. F., Introduction to Materials Science for Engineers, Mac Millan Publishing,
1992.
2. Cottrell, A., An Introduction to Metallurgy, Universities Press, 2000.
3. Smith, W. F., Materials Science and Engineering, 4th Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2008.
4. Van Vlack, L. H., Elements of Material Science and Engineering, 6th Edition, Pearson
Education, 2006.
Online Course Material
1. Granta Design, CES EduPack Software, 2016.