Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
PG Course Booklet
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
July 2019
M.Tech & M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree
in
Data and Computational Science
(1) Introduction
Data Science is the art of generating insight, knowledge and predictions by processing of data
gathered about a system or a process. Computational Science is the art of developing validated
(simulation) models in order to gain a better understanding of a phenomenon (system’s or
processes). Computational sciences focus on development of causal models using latent patterns in
the observed data, rather than only extracting patterns or knowledge from data by statistical
methods.
(2) Objective of the Programme
To produce professionals with deep knowledge and innovative analytical and computational
research skills to handle problems in a variety of domains including governance, finance, security,
transportation, healthcare, energy management, agriculture, population studies, weather
prediction, economics, social sciences, predictive maintenance, structural health monitoring, smart
manufacturing and computational structural biology.
(3) Expected Graduate Attributes (M.Tech.)
1. Skill set to clean, process, analyze, manage and handle security and privacy aspects of
structured and unstructured data.
2. Ability to identify, design and apply appropriate pattern recognition and data mining
methods for generating relevant insight from data.
3. Knowledge and capability to develop and apply machine learning techniques for data driven
modelling.
4. Ability to develop models and simulation schemes based upon domain knowledge in chosen
domains and possible combination with data driven models.
5. Capability to follow uniquely interdisciplinary approach for solving problems, using
knowledge of mathematics, statistics, computing and one or more selected domains among
physics, chemistry, biology and engineering sciences.
6. Skill to use and design appropriate visualization techniques for representation and
presentation of insights and solutions.
7. Ability to innovate and contribute towards next generation data driven technology
development.
8. High quality technical communication skills.
9. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics.
10. Ability to plan and manage technical projects.
(4) Learning outcome:
1. Strong Understanding of fundamentals of Data Mining, Machine Learning, Modelling &
Simulation, Optimization and Numerical Techniques.
2. Basic understanding of Cryptographic and Blockchain Techniques.
3. Knowledge about basics and use of visual analytics.
4. Skill set to develop applications using Big Data.
5. Advanced analytical and data driven modelling and simulation skills to address technological
challenges in one or more specialized knowledge domains like physics, chemistry, biology
and engineering sciences.
6. Demonstrate skills to communicate scientific ideas and/or application systems.
7. Acquire project management skills.
(5) Program Structure:
Cat. Course
Number
Course Title L-T-P Credits Cat. Course
Number
Course Title L-T-P Credits
Semester 1 Semester 2
C MAL7XX0 Introduction to
Data Science
1-0-0-0 1 C MAL7XX0 Numerical
Methods for PDE
1-0-0-0 1
C CSL7XX0 Machine
Learning 1
3-0-0-0 3 C CSL8XX0 Machine Learning
2
3-0-0-0 3
C MAL7XX0 Mathematics for
Data Science
3-0-0-0 3 C CSL7XX2 Software and
Data
Architecture*
1-0-0-0 1
C MAL7XX0 Statistics 2 2-0-0-0 2 C CSL7XX0 Security and its
Application
3-0-0-0 3
C MAL7XX0 Introduction to
Modeling
1-0-0-0 1 C MAP7XX0 Data Analytics
Lab
0-0-2-0 1
E xxxxx PE1 3-0-0-0 3 E Xxxxx PE2 3-0-0-0 3
C CSP7XX0 Data structures
and practices
0-0-2-0 1 E Xxxxx PE3 3-0-0-0 3
NG xxxxx Technical
Communication
1-0-0-0 1 NG xxxxx Innovation andIP
Management
1-0-0-0 1
Total 15 Total 16
Semester 3 Semester 4
E xxxxx PE4 3-0-0-0 3 E Xxxxx OE2 3-0-0-0 3
E xxxxx PE5 3-0-0-0 3
E xxxxx OE1 3-0-0-0 3
P MA6xx Project 0-0-0-5 5 P MA6xx Project 0-0-0-
11
11
NG xxxxx System
Engineering and
Project
Management
1-0-0-0 1 NG xxxxx Professional Ethics 1-0-0-
0
1
Total 15 Total 15
Grand Total 61
*A fractal from the course.
Credit Distribution
S.No. Category Course
Category Title
Total
Courses
Total
Credits
1 C Compulsory 9 18
2 C Labs 2 02
3 PE Program Electives 5 15
4 OE Open Electives 2 6
5 P Project 1 16
Total (without non-graded courses) 57
(6) Topic Cloud
Compulsory Topics:
(a) Data pre-processing (including redundancy removal), Data storage, data
representation, data handling, data query, data cleaning.
(b) Relational data bases, graph databases, NoSQL (columnar DB), unstructured data,
Map reduced techniques and Indexing.
(c) Distributions, test of hypothesis, stochastic process, queuing process, sampling
techniques, Probabilistic models, Mixture models, Latent Models, prediction models,
Association Analysis, Correlation analysis, Evaluation and Validation, performance
analysis/metrics
(d) Vector and matrix algebra, Decompositions, SVD, pseudo inverse, rank approximation
(e) Linear and Non-linear Programming.
(f) Classification, regression, prediction, clustering, anomaly detection, feature
engineering, supervised/ unsupervised Learning, Fundamental of SVM, Kernel
techniques, States space machine, Markov decision process, ANN, Deep learning and
its implementation, Deep learning application lab (GPU environment, Python
environment) , Higher level Machine learning, Transfer learning, online and
incremental learning, reinforcement learning, explain-ability in Machine Learning, Bias
variance trade-off, ensemble learning, Auto ML
(g) Discrete models, continuous models, Hybrid models (both analytical and data driven
models), assumptions, approximations, models validation, MCS
(h) Numerical methods for PDEs
(i) Cryptosystems (types)
Elective Topics:
Financial engineering, Computational finance, Computational Game Theory, Graph Theory,
Dynamical Systems, Reliability Theory, Stochastic Processes, Representation of Finite Groups,
Computational linguistics, Computational economics, Digital Humanities, Cultural informatics,
Blockchain, security and privacy, AR/VR, Natural Language Processing and Text analytics,
Visualization, Machine learning for big data, Human-machine interface, Computational
modelling in materials design, Bioinformatics, Computational biology, Digital Image Analysis,
Coding Theory, Robotics, Computational electro magnetism, Computational optics, Quantum
Information System, Quantum Cryptography, Quantum Computing, Computational Physics,
Computational material science, Computational chemistry, adaptive numerical methods,
multi-grid methods, parallel methods, GPU computation.
(7) List of Program Electives
(a) Electives from sister Departments:
S.No. Course Title S.No. Course Title
Department of Mathematics Department of Electrical Engineering
1 Financial Engineering 19 Digital Image Processing and
Applications
2 Computational Game Theory 20 Digital Video Processing
3 Advanced topics in computational PDE 21 Coding Theory
22 Compressive Sensing
4 Dynamical Systems 23 Machine Learning for Communication
5 Reliability Theory 24 Compressive Sensing
6 Stochastic Processes 25 Data Compression
7 Representation of Finite Groups Department of Mechanical Engineering
8 Shared Computational Economics 26 Robotics
Department of Humanities and Social
Sciences
27 Probabilistic Methods in Engineering
Department of Physics
9 Cultural informatics 28 Computational Physics
Department of Computer Science and
Engineering
29 Computational material science
Department of Chemistry
10 Computational linguistics 30 Computational Chemistry
11 Introduction to Virtual and Augmented
Reality
Department of Metallurgical and Materials
Engineering
12 Natural Language Processing 31 Computational Materials Engineering
13 Visualization/Data Visualization Department of Biosciences and
bioengineering14 Artificial Intelligence 1
15 Artificial Intelligence 2 32 Omics Technologies
16 Human Machine Interface 33 Algorithm development
17 Graph Theory and its Applications 34 Computational modeling in material
design17 Bio-image Computing
18 Computer Vision 35 Applications in Multi Omics data,
Imaging, Sensors
(b) Electives from IDRPs:
Digital Humanities
1 Introduction to Digital Humanities
Quantum Computing
2 Introduction to Quantum Information
3 Quantum Computing
4 Facets of Quantum Information
5 Quantum Cryptography and Coding
(c) Specialized electives:
1 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - I (1-0-0-0)
2 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - II (2-0-0-0)
3 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - III (3-0-0-0)
(8) Content of compulsory courses:
Title Introduction of Data Science Number MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Introduce the basics of data science and its underlying concepts.
2. Introduce data processing, manipulation and cleaning techniques.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Acquire familiarity with the basic concepts of data science.
2. Distinguish between different kinds of data and data governance.
3. Understand the preparation and processing of the data.
Contents
[14 Lectures] Data preparation, Data pre-processing, Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data
Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Removal, Data storage, Data Handling, Querying
Data, Data Representation and Exploration, Big Data.
Text Books
1. Kotu, V. and Deshpande, B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, Morgan
Kaufmann.
2. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE Publications.
3. Kelleher, J.D., and Tierney, B. (2018) Data Science, MIT Press.
Reference Books
1. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction to Data Analytics,
John Wiley & Sons.
2. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide to work, life
and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications.
Online course Material
Not Available
Title Mathematics for Data Science Number MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide an understanding statistical concepts for data scientist.
2. Train the student to do Matrix Computations for implementing various numerical
linear algebra algorithms.
3. Train student in the domain of linear and non-linear programming.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Derive distributional results needed for the statistical hypothesis testing and perform
the hypothesis testing for the parameters of the normal population.
2. Understand the numerical linear algebraic methods and their usage for data analysis.
3. Apply programming concepts for further applications in different areas of interest.
Contents:
MAL7XX1: Statistical Techniques [1-0-0-0]
Probability Models and Sampling Techniques[3 Lectures]: Normal, Chi-Square and t
distributions, Basic concepts of random sampling, sampling from normal distribution,
properties of sample mean and sample variance.
Tests of Hypotheses[5 Lectures]: Basic concepts of statistical hypotheses testing-simple and
composite hypotheses, critical regions, Type-I and Type-II errors, size and power of a test,
Neyman Pearson lemma, tests for one-sample and two-sample problems from normal
populations.
Stochastic Processes[6 Lectures]: Definition and classification of general stochastic
processes; Markov Chains: definition, transition probability matrices, classification of states,
limiting properties; Poisson process, Birth and death processes, exponential queuing model.
MAL7XX2: Matrix Computations [1-0-0-0]
Matrix Algebra [3 Lectures]:Matrix operations and type of matrices, Rank of Matrix,
Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors and Diagonalizable matrices, Vector Norms, Matrix Norms.
Decompositions [9 Lectures]:Spectral decomposition, Schur Decomposition, QR
Factorization, Singular value decomposition (SVD), Polar Decomposition, Pseudo Inverse.
Approximations [2 Lectures]: Least square approximations, Low-Rank Approximation.
MAL7XX3: Optimization [1-0-0-0]
Linear Programming Problem[4 Lectures]: Linear combination of vectors, Convex set,
Convex hull, Linear programming problem, feasible solution, basic feasible solution,
graphical solution, Simplex method, Charne’s M method.
Duality and IPP[6 Lectures]: Dual of an LPP, Integer Programming, Gomory’s cut-constraint
method.
Nonlinear Programming[4 Lectures]: First and second order conditions, Constrained
optimization - Lagrange Multipliers, Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions.
Text Books
(Fractal 1)
1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002), Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning.
2. Ross, S.M. (1996), Stochastic Processes, Wiley.
(Fractal 2)
3. Mayer, C.D. (2000) Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra, SIAM.
4. Strang, G., (2006), Linear Algebra and its Applications.
5. Elden, L. (2007) Matrix Methods in Data Mining and Pattern Recognition, SIAM.
(Fractal 3)
6. Luenberger, D. G., Linear and Nonlinear Programming, Yinyu Ye, Third Edition,
Springer, 2008
7. Kambo, N. S., Mathematical Programming Techniques, Second Edition, Affiliated East
West Press, 2005
Reference Books
(Fractal 1)
1. Rohatgi, V.K. and Saleh, A.K.M.E. (2018). An Introduction to Probability and
Statistics, Wiley.
2. Ross, S.M. (2010). An Introduction to Probability Models, Elsevier.
3. Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. and Stone, C.J. (1972). Introduction to Stochastic Processes,
Houghton Mifflin Company.
(Fractal 2)
4. M Goloub, G.H. and Charles, F.V.L. (2013) Matrix Computations, JHU Press.
5. Lancaster, P. and Tismenetsky, M. (1985) The Theory of Matrices: With Applications,
Academic Press.
(Fractal 3)
6. Bazaraa, M. S., Sherali, H.D., and Shetty, C. M., Nonlinear Programming: Theory and
Algorithms, Third Edition, Wiley publications, 2006
7. Darst, R, Introduction to Linear Programming: Applications and Extensions, Dekker
Publications, 1991
Online course Material
(Fractal 2)
1. Agrawal, P.N., Numerical Linear Algebra, NPTEL course material, Department of
Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology
Roorkee,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107106/
(Fractal 3)
2. Goswami A., Chakraborty D., Optimization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Kharaggpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105039/
Title Advanced Statistical Techniques Number MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 2–0–0-0 [2]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide an understanding of the statistical concepts and their real-life applications.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Estimate the parameters of the underlying population;
2. Gain the basic knowledge of mixture models, latent models, association, correlation and
regression analysis.
Contents:
Estimation [4 Lectures]: Point estimation-maximum likelihood estimator, methods of evaluating
estimators; Interval estimation- Methods of finding confidence intervals.
Mixture Models and Latent Models [3 Lectures]: Basic ideas, finite mixtures, continuous mixtures,
conditional mixing distributions; Latent models.
Association and Correlation Analysis [7 lectures]: Categorical data, consistency of data,
independence and association of attributes; Measures of association – Pearson’s and Yule’s
measures, Goodman-Kruskal’s γ, Odds Ratio; Fitting of logit model through least squares,
Properties of product moment correlation coefficient, Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient.
Regression Analysis [14 lectures]:Model building, data collection, uses of regression; Simple linear
regression model - Least-Squares estimation of the parameters, hypothesis testing on the slop and
the intercept, interval estimation, prediction of new observations, coefficient of determination;
Multiple linear regression model - estimation of the model parameters, hypothesis testing,
confidence intervals, prediction of new observations; Model adequacy checking-residual analysis;
Validation techniques.
Text Books
1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning.
2. Marshall, A.W. and Olkin, I. (2007). Life Distributions: Structure of Nonparametric,
Semiparametric and Parametric families, Springer.
3. Gun, A.M., Gupta, M.K. and Dasgupta, B. (1998): Fundamentals of Statistics (V-1), World
Press.
4. Montgomery, D.C., Peck, E.A. and Vining, G.G. (2012). Introduction to Linear Regression
Analysis, Wiley.
Reference Books
1. Rohatgi, V.K. and Saleh, A.K.M.E. (2018). An Introduction to Probability and Statistics,
Wiley.
2. Draper, N.R. and Smith, H. (1998). Applied Regression Analysis, Wiley.
3. Ross, S. (2012). Simulation, Academic Press
Online course Material
1. Panchenko, D., Statistics for Applications, Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT Open
Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-443-statistics-for-applications-
fall-2006/#.
Title Introduction to Modeling Number MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [1]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Introduce various modeling techniques
2. Explain how to analyses mathematical models
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Model a given scenario using appropriate mathematical techniques
2. Analyze and draw conclusions about the process/system under consideration
Contents
Principles of mathematical modeling [4 lectures]: Assumptions, approximations, abstraction, scale,
conservation and balance principles, dimensional homogeneity and consistency, model validation
Modeling Methods [10 lectures]: Continuous models, discrete models, models of hybrid systems,
use of differential equations, variational principles, Data driven models.
Textbooks
1. Gershenfeld, N. (1999) The Nature of mathematical modelling, Cambridge University Press.
2. Haberman, R. (1998) Mathematical models, SIAM.
Reference Books
1. Dym, C.L. (2004) Principles of mathematical modeling, Academic Press.
2. Boccara, N. (2010) Modeling complex systems, Springer.
Online Course Material
Not available
Title Numerical Methods for PDE Number MAL8XX1
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will
1. Introduce finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations.
2. Carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential equations.
2. Undertake out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes
Contents
[8 Lectures] Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic and
hyperbolic problems.
[6 Lectures]Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion, error
estimates.
Text books
1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential Equations,
Springer, 1997
2. Morton, K. W. and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential equations, CUP,
2005
Reference Books
1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference methods, Springer,
1995
2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997
Online Course Material
1. Nayak, A. K. , Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/
Title Data Analytics Lab Number MAP7XX0
Department Mathematical L-T-P-D [C] 0–0–2-D [1]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will
1. Introduce the basics of R software and then train to write scripts, create a work
environment, and data handling and data visualization.
2. Enable students to be able to analyse the data using R.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand R language fundamentals and basic syntax.
2. Comprehend What R is and how it’s used to perform data analysis.
3. Create their own R code for visualizations of data.
Contents
Basic calculations with R, Descriptive statistics [3 Labs]: Introduction to R Software, Basics and
calculations with Data Vectors, Built-in-commands and Missing Data Handling, Operations with
Matrices, Variables and Types of Data, Absolute, relative frequency and frequency distribution,
Graphs and plots.
Central tendency of data and Variation in data [4 Labs]:Arithmetic Mean, Median, Quantiles, Mode,
Geometric Mean and Harmonic Mean, Range, Interquartile Range and Quartile Deviation, Absolute
Deviation and Absolute Mean Deviation, Mean Squared Error, Variance and Standard Deviation,
Coefficient of Variation and Boxplots.
Moments, Association of Variables, Fitting of Linear Models [7 Labs]:Central Moments, Absolute
Moments and Computation of Moments, Skewness and Kurtosis, Univariate and Bivariate Scatter
Plots, Quantile in 3D plots, Correlation Coefficient, Rank Correlation Coefficient, Measure of
Association for Discrete and Counting Variables, Least Squares Method.
Text Books
1. Wickham, H. and Grolemund, G. (2016) R for Data Science: Import, Tidy, Transform,
Visualize, and Model Data, 'O'Reilly Media, Inc.
2. Toomey, D. (2014) R for Data Science, Packt Publishing Ltd.
3. Healy, K. (2018) Data Visualization: A Practical Introduction, Princeton University Press.
Reference Books
1. Knell, R.J. (2014) Introductory R: A Beginner’s Guide to Data Visualisation,
2. Stinerock, R. (2018) Statistics with R: A Beginner's Guide, SAGE publication.
Online Course Material
1. Shalab, Descriptive Statistics with R Software, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Mathematics and Statistics, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104120/
(9) Content of Elective courses:
Course Title Dynamical Systems Course No. MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. To introduce the concept of linear and nonlinear dynamical systems.
2. To learn the basic concepts in dynamical systems, like, evolution of system, fixed points,
periodic points, attractors, bifurcation process and stability of the systems.
3. To understand the nonlinearity in nature and study of the nonlinear models in engineering
and its dynamics.
4. Use Matlab and simulink for solving dissipative dynamical systems, which are relevant for
engineering models.
Learning Outcomes
1. Construction of phase portraits of nonlinear system and understanding of fundamental
difference between linear and nonlinear systems.
2. Identification of attractors, like, fixed points, periodic attractors, Cantor sets, Chaotic attractor
and in the continuous case, limits cycles.
3. Understanding the different bifurcations, like, saddle node, period doubling etc.
Contents
Linear and Nonlinear Dynamical Systems [Lectures 12]: History of Dynamics, The importance of
being Nonlinear, A Dynamical view of the world, Examples of dynamical systems, Uncoupled
Linear systems, Diagonalization, Exponential of operators, Linear systems in R^2 and Stability
theory, Nonhomogeneous Linear systems, Nonlinear differential equations, Vector field of
nonlinear systems, Phase portrait, Limit cycles and their stability.
One-dimensional Discrete maps [Lectures 12]: Logistic maps, period doubling bifurcations, Flip
and tangent bifurcations, Periodic windows, Intermittency transcritical, Lyapunov exponent,
Universality and Experiments.
Dynamics of Continuous and Discrete Systems: [Lectures 18]: Lorenz equations, Rossler
Equation, Chua's circuit, Forced pendulum, Stable and Unstable manifolds, Basin boundary,
Horseshoe maps, Boundary crisis, Interior crisis, Statistics of Chaotic attractor, Frequency
spectra of orbits, Matrix times circle.
Textbook
1. Steaven, S., Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applications to Physics, Biology,
Chemistry, and Engineering, 1st Ed., Levant Books, 2007
2. Alligood, K., Sauer, T., and Yorke, J., Chaos: An Introduction to Dynamical Systems,
Second Edition, Springer, 2008.
Reference Books
1. Devaney, R.L., An Introduction to Chaotic Dynamical Systems, Addison Wesley, 2005.
2. Holmgren, A.R., A First course in discrete dynamical systems, Springer.
Online course Material
1. Banerjee S., NPTEL Course on Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic Systems, Department of
Electrical Engineering, IIT Kharagpurhttps://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/
Title Stochastic Processes Number MAL8XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite Probability and Linear Algebra
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide background in the area of Random Processes.
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further
applications in their respective domains of interest.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Develop basic understanding of the Stochastic Process, Random Walk and Martingales.
2. Impart knowledge in Markov Chain, Birth and Death Process, Brownian Motion, Stochastic
Calculus
Contents
[4 Lectures] Conditional probability and conditional expectation, properties of conditional
expectation.
[8 Lectures]Stochastic processes, stationarity, finite-dimensional distributions, stopping times,
stopped sigma-fields and processes, right-continuous and canonical filtrations, adapted and
previsible processes.
[8 Lectures]Random walk; Gaussian distribution: for variables, vectors and processes, non-
degeneracy, stationarity, closeness under 2-mean convergence.
[12 Lectures]Brownian motion, Gaussian construction, independence of increments, scaling and
time inversion, Levy's martingale characterization, reflection principle, law of its maximum in an
interval and first hitting time of positive levels, modulus of continuity, quadratic and total variation.
Related processes: Geometric Brownian motion, Brownian bridge, Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process and
martingales.
[10 Lectures]Poisson distribution, approximation, rate, construction, independence of increments,
memoryless property of the Exponential law, the dual process of independent Exponential inter-
arrivals, the order statistics of independent uniform samples.
Textbook
1. Ross, S. M. (2018), Stochastic Processes, Wiley
Reference Books
1. Ross, S. M. (2005), Introduction to Probability Models, Elsevier
2. Shreve, S. E. (2008), Stochastic Calculus for Finance II, Springer
Online course Material
1. Wu, H., Introduction to Stochastic Processes, Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT
Open Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-445-introduction-to-
stochastic-processes-spring-2015/.
Title Computational Game Theory Number MAL8XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite Basics of Optimization Theory
Objectives
1. Provide background in the area of computational game theory.
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further
applications in their respective domains of interest.
Learning Outcomes
1. Understanding of fundamentals like Nash equilibrium, dominant strategies and their
applications.
2. Basic understanding of the Co-operative games, iterated games and mixed strategies.
3. Knowledge of non-co-operative games, Zermelo’s algorithm and their applications.
Contents
[12 lectures]: Von Neumann and Morgenstern utility functions, expected utility and expected
utility maximization, Paradoxes of expected utility maximization, Compact representations for
preference relations, Dichotomous preferences and goals. Representations for specifying goals,
Strategic Form Non-Cooperative Games, Basic model and solution concepts, pure strategy Nash
equilibrium, dominant strategies, notable games, coordination games and focal points, complexity
of pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
[14 Lectures]: Mixed strategies: Nash’s theorem and Nash equilibrium, Computing mixed strategy
Nash equilibria, Lemke-Howson algorithm, Zero sum games, Minimax Theorem, Compact
representations for strategic form games, Boolean games, congestion games, Iterated Games:
Finitely repeated games and backward induction, Infinitely repeated games, measuring utility over
infinite plays modelling strategies as finite state machines with output (Moore machines); The Folk
theorems, Iterated Boolean games, Axelrod’s tournament, the Hawk-Dove game, evolutionary
game theory, evolutionarily stable strategies.
[16 lectures]: Extensive Form Non-Cooperative Games: Zermelo’s algorithm and backward
induction, subgame perfect equilibrium, Zermelo’s theorem, Compact representations for
extensive form games, PEEK games and EXPTIME-completeness results, the Game Description
Language (GDL), Imperfect information games, PEEK games with incomplete information,
Cooperative Games: Transferable utility (TU) characteristic function games, basic model, stability
& fairness solution concepts, cost of stability, Shapley value, Banzhaf index, induced subgraph
representation, marginal contribution nets, Simple TU games, swap and trade robustness,
weighted voting games, vector weighted voting games, network flow games, NTU games and their
representations
Textbooks
1. G. Chalkiadakis, E. Elkind, and M Wooldridge, Computational Aspects of Cooperative Game
Theory, Morgan-Claypool, 2011.
2. Machler, E. Solan, S. Zamir, Game Theory, Cambridge U.P., 2013.
3. M. J. Osborne, An Introduction to Game Theory, Oxford U.P., 2004.
Reference Books
1. R. D. Luce and H. Raiffa, Games and Decisions, Wiley, 1958
2. M. J. Osborne and A. Rubinstein, A Course in Game Theory, 1994.
Online course Material
Not Available
Title Advanced topics in Computational PDE Number MAL8XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite ODEs, PDEs and numerical methods
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Introduce multi-grid methods,
2. Introduce parallel computing methods,
3. Explain use multi-grid methods and parallel computing methods.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability
1. to solve partial differential equation using multi-grid methods,
2. to speed up computations using parallel numerical methods.
Contents
Multi-grid methods [20 lectures]: Review of classical finite difference schemes for numerical
solution of partial differential equations, Fourier analysis for error propogation, influence of grid
parameters, grid hierarchies, multi-grid cycles, convergence monitors, smoother, W-cycle and
nested iteration, coarse-grid solver, multigrid as a preconditioner, Numerical implementations
with Diffpack programming
Parallel Computing [20 lectures]: Need for parallel computation, different hardware
architectures, message-passing programming model, multicomputer model, OPEN MP, MPI,
CUDA, parallel linear algebra operations, parallel algorithms for linear systems with special
structures, parallel implementation of direct and iterative methods for solution of linear
systems, parallelizing finite difference schemes (wave Equation, heat condunction equation)
Textbooks
1. Langtangen H. P. and Tveito, A. (Editors) (2003) Advanced topics in computational
partial differential equations: Numerical methods and Diffpack programming, Springer
2. Briggs, W. L., Henson, V. E., and McCormick, S. F. (2000) A multigrid tutorial, 2nd Ed.,
SIAM
3. Grama, A., Gupta, A., Karypis, G., and Kumar, V. (2003) Introduction to parallel
computing, 2nd Ed, Pearson
Reference Books
1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. (1997), Numerical approximations of partial differential
equations, 2nd Edition, Springer
2. Bertsekas, D. P. and Tsitsiklis, J. N. (1997) Parallel and distributed computation:
Numerical methods, Prentice-Hall
Online Course Material
1. M. Ramakrishna, Introduction to computational fluid dynamics, NPTEL course material,
Department of Aerospace Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Madras,
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/101106045/
2. Subodh Kumar, Parallel Computing, NPTEL course material, Department of Computer
Science and Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Delhi,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102114/
Title Financial Engineering Number MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Securities Pricing Securities, Risk Management Assessment, prediction and decision making,
under uncertainty, regarding future events and their consequences
2. Portfolio Optimization Balancing risk and return
3. Modeling Pricing of derivatives and Itos calculus
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Valuation of financial portfolio
2. Pricing of financial derivatives (options and contracts)
3. Understanding risk and return
Contents
[18 lectures]Introduction to financial markets and financial instruments, financial derivatives, risk
and return, risky and risk free assets, interest rates, bonds, bonds pricing, spot and forward rates,
investment portfolio, mean-variance analysis, capital asset pricing model, arbitrage pricing theory.
[22 lectures]Discrete time models, stock and money market models, principle of no arbitrage,
pricing of contracts (forward and future), options, put-call parity, option pricing, martingales,
Binomial model, CRR model, Black-Scholes formula, Greeks, random walk, Brownian motion,
stochastic process, Itos integral and Ito-Deoblins formula.
Textbook
1. M. Capinski and T. Zastawniak (2010). Mathematics for finance: an introduction to financial
engineering, Springer.
2. S.N. Neftci (2009). Principles of financial engineering. Academic Press/Elsevier.
Reference Books
1. J.C. Hull (2011). Options, futures and other derivatives. Pearson India.
2. S.E. Shreve (2000). Stochastic calculus for finance I: The binomial asset pricing model,
Springer
Online Course Material
Not Available
Title Reliability Theory Number MAL8XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite Probability and Statistics
Objectives
1. To understand the basic concepts of statistical reliability theory and their various real-life
applications.
Learning Outcomes
1. Understand the basic notion of systems, different reliability measures, different notions of
ageings, different semiparametric models, shock models and dependence structures;
2. Gain the ability to handle different issues in system reliability.
Contents
Basic Notion of Systems [6 lectures]: Structure function, coherent systems, k-out-of-n systems,
dual structures, cut and path sets, modular decomposition.
Reliability Measures [5 lectures]: Survival/Reliability functions, hazard rate function, reversed
hazard rate function, residual lifetime, inactivity time, mean residual lifetime function, mean
inactivity time, reliability bounds.
Semiparametric Models [6 lectures]:Common life distributions, scale model, proportional hazard
rate model, proportional reversed hazard rate model, proportional odds model, proportional mean
residual lifetime model.
Stochastic Ageings [8 lectures]: Notions of stochastic ageing, different ageing classes, ageing
properties of common life distributions, closure properties of different ageing classes under
formation of coherent structures, convolutions and mixtures.
Shock Models and Dependence Structures [7 lectures]: Univariate and bivariate shock models,
notions of bivariate and multivariate dependence structures.
Issues in System Reliability [10 lectures]: Maintenance and replacement policies, availability of
repairable systems, optimization of system reliability with redundancy.
Text Books
1. Barlow, R.E. and Proschan, F. (1975). Statistical Theory of Reliability and Life Testing. Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, New York.
2. Lai, C.D. and Xie, M. (2006). Stochastic Ageing and Dependence for Reliability. Springer,
New York.
3. Marshall, A.W. and Olkin, I. (2007). Life Distributions. Springer, New York.
Reference Books
1. Barlow, R.E. and Proschan, F. (1965). Mathematical Theory of Reliability. Wiley, New York.
2. Samaniego, F.J. (2007). System Signatures and their Applications in Engineering
Reliability. Springer, New York.
Online Course Material
Not Available
Title Representations of finite groups Number MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. The goal of this course is to give an introduction to representation theory and to understand
representations of symmetric groups.
Learning Outcomes
1. Representation theory and characters of finite groups.
2. Representation theory of Symmetric groups.
Contents
Group Action and Modules[6 Lectures]: Groups and Examples (Recall), Group action, Conjugacy
Classes, Modules: Definition and Examples.
Basic concepts of Representation Theory[10 Lectures]: Representations and basic examples,
FG-modules, Group algebra, Irreducible representations, complete reducibility and Maschke’s
theorem, Schur’s lemma.
Characters and Burnside’s pq Theorem[10 Lectures]: Character theory of representations,
orthogonality relations, decomposition of the regular representation. Character Tables of some
groups, Characters and Algebraic Integers, Burnside’s pq-theorem.
Representation theory of symmetric groups[16 Lectures]: Tensor products, Restriction of a
representation, induced representations, Frobenius reciprocity, Mackey’s irreducibility criterion,
Representation theory of symmetric groups, Few applications of Representation Theory (if time
permits).
Text Books
1. Benjamin Steinberg, Representation Theory of Finite Groups, Springer (Universitext),
2012.
2. Gordon James and Martin Liebeck, Representations and Characters of Groups, Cambridge
University Press, 2001.
Reference Books
1. William Fulton and Joe Harris, Representation Theory: A First Course, Springer (Graduate
Texts in Mathematics 129), 1991.
2. Amritanshu Prasad, Representation Theory: A Combinatorial Viewpoint, Cambridge
University Press, 2015.
Online Course Material
Not Available
Title Computational Linguistics Number CSL8XX0
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech./PhD Type Elective
Prerequisite Basic Probability Theory
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Enable students to develop computational models for languages.
2. Introduced linguistic structure of an unfamiliar language in terms of morphology, syntax,
and orthography.
3. Impart knowledge of linguistic descriptions of a language combined with some textual
resource in the language.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Do an exhaustive search of resources in and about a language without many resources.
2. Resolve technical, logistical, and ethical issues involved in constructing a keyboard layout
for a language's morphology and orthography.
3. Design and implement general approaches in rule-based machine translation.
Contents
Introduction[2 Lectures]: Definition of computational linguistics, Ambiguity and uncertainty in
language, The Turing test.
Regular Expressions[6 Lectures]: Chomsky hierarchy, regular languages, and their limitations,
Finite-state automata, Practical regular expressions for finding and counting language phenomena,
morphology, syntax and orthography.
String Edit Distance[6 Lectures]: Key algorithmic tool: dynamic programming, optimal alignment of
sequences, String edit operations, edit distance, spelling correction, and machine translation.
Context Free Grammar[4 Lectures]: Constituency, CFG definition, use and limitations. Chomsky
Normal Form, Top-down parsing, bottom-up parsing, Efficient CFG parsing with CYK, Earley parser.
Language modelling[10 Lectures]: Definition of information and its measurement, noisy channel
model, the language Shannon game, Entropy, cross-entropy and information gain for language
phenomena, Probabilistic language modelling and its applications, estimating the probability of a
word, and smoothing, Generative models of language and their application to building an
automatically-trained email spam filter, and automatically determining the language.
Part of Speech Tagging[4 Lectures]: The concept of parts-of-speech, examples and usage, the
Penn Treebank and Brown Corpus, Collocations and Noun Phrase Parsing.
Word Sense Disambiguation and Clustering[10 Lectures]: Homonomy, polysemy, different
meanings, the power of context, Language neighbourhood as a vector, Agglomerative clustering,
Clustering by expectation maximization, Using clustering to discover different word senses, Semi-
supervised document classification.
Textbook
1. Grishman, R. (1986) Computational Linguistics: An Introduction, Cambridge University
Press.
2. Rosner, M. and Johnson, R. (1992) Computational Linguistics and Formal Semantics,
Cambridge University Press.
3. Jurafsky, D. (2000) Speech & Language Processing, Pearson Education India.
Reference Books
1. Mitkov, R. (2004) The Oxford Handbook of Computational Linguistics, Oxford University
Press.
2. Manning, C.D. and Schütze, H. (1999) Foundations of Statistical Natural Language
Processing, MIT Press.
Online Course Material
Title Computational Economics Number MAL8XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Optimization techniques
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Enable students to understand computational economic models.
2. Impart knowledge to design expressive marketplaces.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Do an exhaustive search of computational economic models.
2. Analyse expressive marketplaces.
3. Design and implement optimal market mechanisms.
Contents
[6 Lectures] Definition of computational economics, basic techniques from mathematics, Linear
programming, (Mixed) integer linear programming, Computational problems, Algorithms, Runtime
of algorithms, Easy and hard problems.
[12 Lectures] Single-item auctions, Combinatorial auctions, Bidding languages, Winner
determination problem, Reverse auctions and exchanges, Expressive financial securities, Barter
exchanges/matching markets.
[12 Lectures] Kidney exchange, Expressive negotiation over donations, Voting and social choice,
Iterative mechanisms/preference elicitation.
[12 Lectures] Risk neutrality and risk aversion, Expected utility theory, Incentive compatibility,
Individual rationality, Revelation principle, Clarke mechanism, Groves mechanisms, Automated
mechanism design and Proper scoring rules.
Textbook
1. Miranda, M.J. and Fackler, P.L. (2004) Applied Computational Economics and Finance, MIT
Press.
2. Afonso, O. and Vasconcelos, P.B. (2015) Computational Economics: A concise introduction,
Routledge.
Reference Books
1. Stokey, N.L. (1989) Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics, Harvard University Press.
2. Chen, S.-H., Kaboudan, M. and Du, Y.-R. (2018) The Oxford Handbook of Computational
Economics and Finance, Oxford University Press.
Online Course Material
Title Computational Chemistry Number CYL7XX0
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Elective
Pre-requisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Describe knowledge of modern techniques in computational methods applied in chemistry.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to:
1. Use modern computational chemistry techniques to solve fundamental problems related to
chemistry.
Contents
Basics: Fundamentals of quantum, classical, and statistical mechanics, mathematical techniques
(10 lectures)
Electronic structure: Variation theory, perturbation theory, electron spin, He atom, Pauli exclusion
principle, Slater determinant (6 lectures)
Electronic structure of diatomic molecules: Born Oppenheimer approximation, Atomic units, H2+
ion, H2 molecule, VB theory, MO theory (8 lectures)
Wave function based theory: Hartree-Fock theory, Electron correlation, Self-consistent field wave
function, Moller-Plesset theory, Coupled cluster formulation (10 lectures)
Basics of Molecular Dynamics: Theoretical foundation, Boltzmann’s relation, harmonic oscillator and
harmonic baths, Algorithms for equations of motions (7 lectures)
Textbook
1. Levine, I. N., (2000) Quantum Chemistry, Pearson education.
2. Lowe, J. P., (1995) Elementary Quantum Chemistry, Academic Press.
Reference Books
1. Szabo, A. and Ostlund, N. S., (1996) Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover.
2. D. Frenkel and B. Smith, (2002), Understanding Molecular Dynamics Simulations,1st Edition,
Academic Press
Self learning Material
1. K. Mangala Sunder, Introduction to Chemistry & Quantum Chemical Methods, NPTEL course
material, Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras, http://nptel.iitm.ac.in