1
M. Tech. and M.Tech-PhD
in
Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
with Major in Energy
2
Introduction
With the tremendous focus on energy sources such as solar, wind, hydropower to name
a few, skills to develop necessary infrastructure for energy generation, transmission
and distribution from these sources are required. To cater to future needs and
emerging infrastructure, the M.Tech. and M. Tech-Ph. D. Program on Civil and
Infrastructure Engineering with a major (specialization) in “Energy” is exclusively
designed. The program is offered to the students/candidates with diverse engineering
backgrounds from India and abroad who are interested in learning and applying the
fundamental and advanced technologies (energy conversion, transmission,
distribution, storage and conservation) in different areas of energy engineering. The
program equips students with a unique set of skills desired in multidisciplinary and
dynamic energy industries. To facilitate prospective graduates with the scope of this
program, “Career Trajectory” maps for all disciplines are developed. A “Career
Trajectory” is a framework for understanding the demand of different energy industries
in terms of skills and their mapping with the courses that are being offered in this
program across multiple departments. It will assist students in identifying the core
skills (general, core, and advanced) and courses to build their career in the chosen
energy industry.
The program constitutes a unique value-added model that allows students to select
courses from a) “Specialized Stream Electives" and (b) "M. Tech Electives" buckets to
build their knowledge in a specialized stream and gain skills they would need to enter
into the desired energy industry. Specialized courses are designed to tap rapidly
changing energy market while employing emerging technologies. Furthermore, it
builds a platform for multidisciplinary research to unravel complex problems associated
with global energy infrastructure. After successful completion of the program, students
will be able to continue to a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) in a number of related areas
of chosen stream. This program potentially delivers an ability to the graduates to
change the landscape of our planet through advanced energy generation and
management practices.
An outline of the concept behind this program is presented in the following sections.
Objective of the Program
IIT Jodhpur Civil and Infrastructure Engineering graduates with a major in Energy will:
1. Enter the industry as professionals and leaders to implement solutions to diverse
technical challenges of energy infrastructure.
2. Pursue innovative and advanced research as scholars and scientists in leading
industry and academic R&D centers around the world to develop state-of-the-art
technologies related to future energy infrastructure.
3. Establish and lead startups in emerging areas of sustainability, resilience,
management, and effective utilization of various sources of energy.
4. Frame policies, management regulations and ethical guidelines correlating dynamic
energy demands, utilization and distribution.
Graduate attributes
A successful graduate should be able to:
1. Understand the relation between different engineering aspects (i.e. electrical,
mechanical, chemical, etc.) of various energy infrastructures.
2. Understand the impacts and limitations of different energy resources under various
conditions.
3
3. Understand and relate the engineering, economy, and policy aspects of energy
utilization.
4. Design and implement energy-efficient infrastructure related to generation,
transmission, distribution of energy.
5. Carry out in-depth multi-faced investigations (e.g. analytical, experimental, and
numerical) in various infrastructure engineering issues and propose innovative
solutions.
6. Design new models, collect relevant data, and perform validation to help in decision
making, developing and implementing advanced energy infrastructure concepts,
and solving engineering issues.
7. Participate and work in interdisciplinary teams, demonstrate knowledge of
advanced management skills, and implement sustainable practices in infrastructure
engineering projects.
Learning outcome
Upon successful completion of the program, the graduate will have an ability
1. To apply and demonstrate acquired knowledge of popular (solar, wind, etc.) and
upcoming (tidal, biomass, fuel cell, hydrogen, etc.) energy technologies and their
operation in infrastructure engineering practices.
2. To apply engineering design and management aspects of the complete lifecycle of
energy: from generation to distribution.
3. To identify, formulate and apply basics of energy harvesting and storage to mitigate
challenges related to power fluctuations.
4. To apply appropriate techniques of modeling and prediction, modern engineering
and IT tools to complex engineering activities with an understanding of the
limitations.
5. To plan, design and execute large scale infrastructure projects on smart cities to
meet future energy needs.
6. To compete, lead, and practice a successful professional career in the core areas
of expertise with specialized knowledge in the interdisciplinary energy
infrastructure sector.
Overall Structure (M. Tech. in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering with Major
in Energy)
Category Program
Core
(PC)
Specializat
ion Stream
Electives
(SSE)
M.
Tech.
Elective
(ME)
M.
Tech.
Open
(MO)
M.
Tech.
Project
(MP)
Non-
Graded
Courses
Total
Graded
Credits 3 17 17 3 16 4 60
Semester wise distribution of credits
Cat
.
Course Title L-T-P Credits Cat. Course Title L-T-P Credits
I Semester II Semester
PC Program Core 3-0-0 3 SSE Specialization stream -
5
3-0-
0
3
SSE Specialization stream -1 3-0-0 3 SSE Specialization stream -
6
0-0-
4
2
SSE Specialization stream -2 3-0-0 3 ME Program Elective – 1 3-0-
0
3
4
SSE Specialization stream -3 3-0-0 3 ME Program Elective – 2 3-0-
0
3
SSE Specialization stream -4 3-0-0 3 ME Program Elective - 3 3-0-
0
3
NG HSN7XX0: Technical
Communication
1-0-0 1 NG HSN7XX0: Professional
Ethics
1-0-
0
1
Total (Graded + Non-graded) 16 Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15
III Semester IV Semester
MP Project-1 0-0-10 5 MP Project-2 0-0-
22
11
ME Program Elective - 4 3-0-0 3 NG OAL7XX0: IP
Management and
Exploitation
1-0-
0
1
ME Program Elective - 5 3-0-0 3
ME Program Elective - 6 2-0-0 2
MO Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3
NG OAN7XX0: Systems
Engineering and Project
Management
1-0-0 1
Total (Graded+ Non-graded) 17 Total (Graded + Non-graded) 12
Program Core Course (PC)
S.No. Course Title L-T-P Credits
1 Introduction to Sustainable Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 3
List of Specialization Stream Elective (SSE) Courses
(Student may choose any 17 credits from the list below in addition to the mandatory
program core)
S.No. Course Title L-T-P Credits
1 Solar Energy and Application 3-0-2 4
2 Wind turbine and Field Design 3-0-2 4
3 Offshore Tidal Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3
4 Offshore Wind Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3
5 Energy Storage 3-0-2 4
6 Power Plant Engineering 3-0-2 4
7 Smart Grid 3-0-2 4
8 Biomass Energy Conversion 3-0-2 4
9 Hydrogen and Methanol Economy 3-0-0 3
10 Plugin Electric Vehicles 3-0-2 4
11 Transmission Infrastructure 3-0-0 3
12 Fuel Cell Technology 3-0-0 3
13 Electrochemical Conversion and Storage 3-0-0 3
14 Advanced Waste Water Treatment 3-0-2 4
15 Selected Topics in Distributed Generations 3-0-0 3
16 Materials for Electrochemical energy Conversion and Storage 2-0-0 2
17 Energy Economics and policy 1-0-0 1
18 Environmental Aspects of Power Plant 1-0-0 1
19 Hydropower 3-0-0 3
5
List of Elective (ME) Courses
Offering
Department
S. No. Course Title L-T-P Credits
Electrical
Engineering
1 Substation Infrastructure 2-0-0 2
2 Gas Insulated Substations 2-0-0 2
3 Power System Protection 3-0-0 3
4 Cyber-Physical Security in Smart Grid 3-0-0 3
Civil & Infrastructure
Engineering
5 Stability of Slopes 3-0-0 3
6 Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering 3-0-0 3
7 Reliability Engineering 3-0-0 3
8 Structural Dynamics 3-0-0 3
9 Wind and Earthquake Engineering 3-0-0 3
10 Offshore Geo-technology 3-0-0 3
11 Climate Change and Impact 3-0-0 3
12 Air Pollution and Control 3-0-0 3
13 Green Building and Sustainable
Materials
3-0-0 3
14 Traffic Flow Theory 3-0-0 3
15 Traffic System and Management 3-0-0 3
16 Soil Stabilization and Ground
Improvement
3-0-0 3
17 Foundation Engineering 3-0-0 3
Mechanical
Engineering
18 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3
19 Theory of Vibration 3-0-0 3
20 Remote Sensing and GIS for
Environmental Management
3-0-2 4
21 Solid Waste Management 3-0-0 3
Chemical
Engineering
22 Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion 1-0-0 1
23 Wave Energy Conversion 1-0-0 1
24 Process Safety and Hazard 3-0-0 3
25 Advanced Energy Systems 3-0-0 3
26 Microfluidic Fuel Cell 1-0-0 1
Physics 27 Optics for Solar Energy Applications 3-0-0 3
28 Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3
Computer Science
and Engineering
29 Artificial Intelligence – I 3-0-0 3
30 Machine Learning - I 3-0-0 3
TBD* 31 Selected Topic in Energy Science and
Engineering
3-0-0 3
* Topic and course contents focusing on the emerging areas and energy technologies would be
designed by the course instructor (or Department)
6
Topic Clouds Mapped with Specialization Stream Elective Courses (SSE)
S.No. Courses Offering Department Topic clouds
1 Solar Energy
and Application
Mechanical
Engineering
Solar radiations; Measurement;
Concentrated Solar Power; Energy
conversion; Thermal comfort; Passive
heating and cooling; Daylighting;
Energy efficiency; Evaporative
cooling; Zero energy building;
Building modeling and simulation;
Solar PV; Grid integration; MPPT
techniques; Solar panels
2 Wind Turbine
and Field
Design
Civil & Infrastructure
Engineering
Wind Measurement and statistical
distribution; 2D and 3D
Aerodynamics; Anatomy of wind
turbines; Design of rotor blades;
Horizontal-axis wind turbine;
Vertical-axis wind turbine;
Aeroelasticity; Control mechanisms;
Pitch and stall regulation
3 Offshore Tidal
Energy
Harvesting
Civil & Infrastructure
Engineering
Aerodynamic and hydrodynamic
loads; Rotor and mooring dynamics;
Tidal dynamics and ocean currents;
Tidal energy system design; Control
and stability of tidal power plants;
Failure models
4 Offshore Wind
Energy
Harvesting
Civil & Infrastructure
Engineering
Offshore wind; wave environment;
Fixed and floating offshore platforms;
Wind load on structures; Coupled &
uncoupled analysis; Fatigue analysis;
Offshore wind turbine field design;
Vessel-fleet optimization; Cost-
benefit evaluation; Power Ratio
5 Power Plant
Engineering
Mechanical
Engineering
Thermal power plant; Nuclear power
plant; Hydroelectric power plant;
Solar thermal power plant; Hybrid
power plant; Plant layout, design and
Infrastructure; Boilers; Condensers;
Gas turbine; Wind turbines; Fuel cell;
Plant load and efficiency; Tidal
energy; Geothermal energy;
Generator; Transformer; Energy cost
6 Energy Storage Electrical
Engineering +
Mechanical
Engineering
Energy storage; Thermal energy
storage; Sensible and latent heat
storage; Electrical energy storage;
Capacitors and supercapacitors;
Chemical and Electrochemical energy
storage; Electrolysis; Batteries;
Hydrogen storage; Mechanical energy
storage; Flywheel; Pumped Hydro;
Compressed air energy storage;
Storage Applications;
7 Smart Grid Electrical
Engineering
Smart Grid Basics; Energy
Resources;
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV);
Demand-side management;
Monitoring and Protection
8 Biomass
Energy
Conversion
Chemical and
Engineering +
Bioscience and
Bioengineering
Biofuels and bio power; Biomass
characteristics; Pre-treatment and
processing; Gasification; Pyrolysis;
Anaerobic fermentation; Biogas
7
production; Bioreactors; Process
kinetics; Algal biofuels; Microbial fuel
cell; Hydrogen production; Artificial
photosynthesis
9 Hydrogen and
Methanol
Economy
Chemical
Engineering
Hydrogen and methanol as fuels;
Economic, Environmental,
Sustainability aspects; Production of
hydrogen and methanol as fuel;
Challenges and opportunities;
Infrastructure and logistics of
Hydrogen and methanol production
10 Plugin Electric
Vehicles
Electrical
Engineering
Introduction to EV; Powertrain
Storage systems; Charging
Infrastructure; Vehicle-to-X systems;
Hybrid Electric Vehicle; Vehicle
Communication; PEV integration
11 Transmission
Infrastructure
Electrical
Engineering
Overhead transmission lines;
Underground cables; Marine cables
12 Environmental
Aspects of
Power Plant
Civil & Infrastructure
Engineering
Types of pollutants; Emission
standards; Gasification; Combustion;
Particulate matter control; Flue gas
desulfurization; Types of ash; ash
handling; Sustainable practices
13 Fuel Cell
Technology
Chemical
Engineering
Basic principle of Fuel cell technology;
Kinetics of Fuel cell electrodes;
Charge and mass transport; Modeling
and characterization of fuel cell;
Principles of proton exchange
membrane
14 Electrochemical
Conversion and
Storage
Chemical
Engineering
Introduction to electrochemical
Conversion and Storage; Introduction
to battery and Electrochemical
supercapacitor; Principles of
electrodialysis; Electrochemical
mechanism of Hydrogen production
15 Advanced
Waste Water
Treatment
Chemical
Engineering
Introduction to Waste water
engineering; Principles of
Conventional Waste Water
Treatment; Aerobic and Anaerobic
processes; Mechanism of Advanced
Treatment; Different unit operations
for water recycling and reuse
16 Selected Topics
in Distributed
Generations
Electrical
Engineering
Distributed generation introduction;
Control of distributed generation
Microgrids; Stability Challenges in
grid integration; Ancillary services
17 Hydropower Mechanical
Engineering
+
Electrical
Engineering
+
Civil & Infrastructure
Engineering
Large scale hydropower; Hydropower
turbines; Tidal power; Hydropower
generators; Small Hydropower;
Pumped storage hydropower;
Hydropower house; Site
investigation; Design of embankment
dams; Concrete face rockfill dams;
Concrete gravity dams; Foundation
preparation
18 Materials for
Electrochemical
energy
Conversion and
Storage
Metallurgical &
Materials
Engineering +
Physics
Electrochemical energy storage;
Conversion devices; Types of
batteries; Battery capacity and life;
Materials for batteries; 2D and 3D
batteries; Principle and types of fuel
8
cells; Performance of fuel cells; Types
of solid oxide fuel cells; Hydrogen
storage; capacitor and
supercapacitors; Challenges and
applications
19 Energy
Economics and
policy
Humanities & Social
Sciences
Energy resources; Energy
accounting; Demand analysis;
Demand and load management
9
Course Content of Program Core Course (PC)
Title Introduction to Sustainable
Infrastructure Engineering
Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-Th
[C]
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech/M. Tech-PhD Type Compulsory
Prerequisite B.Tech Degree
Objectives: This course aims at
1. Presenting elements and components of sustainable infrastructure creation and
management.
2. Introducing practices of water management, greenhouse gas reduction, and green
city planning.
Learning Outcomes
The students will acquire-
1. Fundamentals and principles of sustainable engineering design.
2. Knowledge of existing frameworks to achieve long-term sustainability.
3. Methods and techniques for waste water management and greenhouse gas emission
reduction.
4. Knowledge on the engineering and architectural aspects overall green city planning.
Content:
● Process of sustainable engineering design: key principle of sustainability; Integration
of architecture and engineering; design drivers for sustainable infrastructure system;
implementation.
● Sustainable infrastructure framework: Green building rating system; sustainable
infrastructure frameworks: pillars of sustainability, scale-density framework, transect,
built form-ecology framework.
● Water conservation and supply: water management plans; achieving water balance;
analyzing water resources; water supply strategies.
● Integrated water management: integrated stormwater management; urban
stormwater treatment strategies; constraints and barriers to implementation;
graywater treatment and reuse; integrating graywater into a water resources master
plan; blackwater management approaches.
● Energy and greenhouse gases: reducing demand by design; designing sustainable
power supplies; addressing climate change and reducing carbon footprint; policy
measures for increasing energy security and efficiency; design guidelines and
performance standards.
● Sustainable site planning, built systems, and material flows: sustainable site planning;
green streets and transportation network; working with the land; material and waste
flows.
● City-scale approach: Case study1 (Guangzhou: city-scale transformation in China);
Case study 2 (Tianjin: Eco-city master plan); Case-study 3 (PlaNYC: integrated
stormwater approach); Case study 4 (San Francisco city greening initiative)
●
Reference Books
1. S. Bry Sarté (2010) Sustainable Infrastructure. John Wiles & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-0-
470-91293-5.
Learning Material
10
Detailed Course Content of Specialization Stream Courses (SSE)
Title Biomass Energy Conversion Course BBXX
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Illustrate the principles and applications of bio-energy harnessing systems ranging
from conventional processes to the latest developments in the area.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Have an understanding of the existing and emerging biomass to energy technologies.
2. Utilize the knowledge of bioenergy systems while integrating bioenergy with other
renewable energy systems.
3. Suggest potential solutions for energy needs by incorporating bioenergy technology.
Contents
Bioenergy context: Introduction, Biofuels and biopower; automobile and biofuels,
feedstocks (harvested and residual), Emissions from biofuels [Lecture 6].
Thermochemical biomass conversion: Chemical composition, Biomass types and
characteristics, Biomass pre-treatment and processing, Combustion, Gasification, Pyrolysis,
Catalytic conversion of biomass to liquid biofuels, Life cycle analysis [Lecture 14].
Biochemical biomass conversion: Anaerobic fermentation technology: Biogas production,
process microbiology, different types of bioreactors, basic process kinetics, Various types of
biofuels,1st and 2nd generation biofuels, Algal Biofuels, ASTM standards for biofuels,
Engineered microbes for biofuel [Lecture 10].
Bioelectrochemical systems: Introduction to Microbial Fuel cells (MFC), Nernst equation
and electrochemical potential difference, the redox reactions, calculating and measuring
potentials, The exoelectrogenic microbes, MFC components, Applications of MFC, Bio
electrochemical system for Hydrogen production, Artificial photosynthesis [Lecture 12].
Lab: Biomass acid treatment process and estimation of reducing sugars, performing ethanol
fermentation and determine ethanol yield and productivity, performing butanol
fermentation, setting up a biogas production process, Screening cellulose producers from
natural environments, enzyme activity assays for lignocellulosic waste, performing acid
catalysed/base catalysed biodiesel production-comparison of process kinetics, determine
biodiesel yield with sequential base/acid treatment for free fatty acid rich microbial oil,
Setting up Microbial fuel cells,
Textbooks
1. German Solar Energy Society, Ecofys, (2006) Planning and installing bioenergy
systems: A guide for installers, architects and engineers, Earthscan,
2. Vertes, A. A., Qureshi, A., Yukawa, H., Blaschek, H.P.,(2010) Biomass to
Biofuels, Wiley.
3. H. S. Mukunda, Understanding Clean Energy and Fuels from Biomass, Wiley India
Pvt. Ltd., 2011.
Reference Books
1. Stanier, R. Y., (2009) General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co.
2. Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R.,(2001) Microbiology, Tata McGraw - Hill
Education
Online course material
11
Michelle O'Malley, Fueling Sustainability: Engineering Microbial Systems for Biofuel
Production, Spring 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA
12
Title Solar Energy and Applications Number MEL7XX0
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisite B.Tech Degree
Objectives
This course has objectives-
1. to familiarize students with the potential of solar energy to meet the growing energy
demands of society in a sustainable way,
2. to elaborate students, the concepts of solar energy applications in architecture and
infrastructure, and
3. to illustrate solar technologies of producing power and cooling/heating in buildings.
Learning Outcomes
The students will acquire-
1. knowledge of various means of solar energy utilization technologies and their
applications.
2. ability to model, design and evaluate solar energy systems and their applications from
the fundamental principles and methods.
3. practical exposer to various measurement experiments and simulation of applications.
Content:
Solar Radiation: Introduction to Solar Radiation, distribution, measurement and data, Sun
motion, Introduction to Detectors, Radiation on Sloped Surfaces, Principle of conversion of
solar radiation into heat, Thermal comfort, Introduction to Concentrated Solar Power (CSP)
Technologies. [Lectures 14]
Photovoltaics: Photovoltaic (PV) Effect, PV cells, The electrical model of PV cells, effect of
shading, converters for grid integration of solar PV: DC-DC boost converter and inverter,
control of boost converter and inverter, MPPT techniques and implementation. Mounting of
solar panels, design and analysis of solar trees. [Lectures 14]
Energy Efficient Buildings: Building orientation and design, passive heating and cooling
concepts, thumb rules, heat transfer in buildings: Thermal modeling of passive concepts,
Evaporative cooling, Energy efficient windows and daylighting, Earth air tunnel and heat
exchanger, Zero energy building concept and rating systems, Energy conservation building
codes, Software for Building Simulation, Automation and Energy Management of Buildings.
[Lectures 14]
Laboratory Classes [12-13 Classes]
Experiments: Measurement of solar radiation, Measurement of-emissivity, reflectivity,
transmittivity, Performance testing of forced flow & thermosyphon systems, Performance
testing of- solar air heater, dryer, desalination unit, solar flat plate collector, solar
concentrators, Testing and characterization solar PV.
Computational hands-on: Simulation of- Heating and cooling of buildings, Hot water storage
system, Heat exchangers, Grid integration of Solar PV, etc.
Reference Books
1. Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes. John A. Duffie, William A. Beckman. John,
Fourth Edition, Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2013.
2. Renewable Energy Resources: Basic Principles and Applications. G. N. Tiwari, M K.
Ghosal, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, 2004.
3. M.S. Sodha, N.K. Bansal, P.K. Bansal, A. Kumar, and M.A.S.Malik, Solar Passive Building,
Science and Design, Pergamon Press, 1986.
4. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
Learning Material
4. Solar Energy Technology https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105051/
13
5. Solar Photovoltaics Fundamentals, Technology And Applications
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115/107/115107116/
14
Title Wind turbine and field design Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To provide high-level insight into the technical and engineering aspects of wind energy.
2. To develop understanding of advanced principles of aerodynamics and structural
mechanics used in design of wind turbine.
Learning Outcomes
The students will have understanding of:
1. Wind turbine dynamic system behavior with integrated components and their control for
a given application.
2. Computing performance characteristics of the main components of wind turbine.
3. Wind turbine blade aerodynamics to predict force components and moments experienced
by modern wind turbines.
Contents
Wind power: Introduction to wind power: Maximum rated power, power coefficient, average
annual power from a wind turbine, wind speed relationships based on the Beaufort scale, wind
turbine protection from the wind, total energy from the wind, energy content, geographical
resource distribution, influence of terrain, measurement methods and statistical analysis.
(Lectures: 10)
Aerodynamics: Fluid flow concept, 2-D Aerodynamics, 3-D aerodynamics. (Lectures: 12)
Turbines: Introduction and Evolution of wind turbines, classification and status and basic
anatomy of wind turbines, design of turbine rotor blades, HAWTs, VAWTs, Betz and Glaurets
turbine theories and the BEM method, Horizontal and vertical axis wind turbines (HAWTs and
VAWTs), blades, choice of materials and adaptation to different climates, aeroelasticity and
Wind turbine modelling. (Lectures: 10)
Controls: Control mechanisms, control targets, control strategies (pitch and stall regulation).
(Lectures: 10)
Laboratory: Modelling of (a) drivetrain (b) stress generation on wind blades (c) Flow
Modelling Around a Wind Turbine; (d) neck and welding points stress modelling
Textbook
1. J. F. Maxwell, J. G. McGowan, and A. L. Rogers, Wind Energy Explained – Theory,
Design, and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, 2010, ISBN: 978-0-47001500-1.
2. Martin O. L. Hansen, Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines, Second edition, Earthscan, UK,
2008.
15
Title Offshore Tidal Energy Harvesting Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. Holistic introduction of different aspects of a tidal energy system.
2. Introduction of design principles and size optimization.
3. Basics of control and reliability assessment of a tidal system.
Learning Outcomes
1. Knowledge of prefeasibility assessment models.
2. Knowledge of optimization techniques to increase efficiency of a tidal energy system.
3. Different control system of a tidal current turbine.
4. Knowledge of different failure models for reliability assessment.
Content
Introduction of tidal energy: Principles and components of tidal power plants; Available
technologies and concepts; Estimation of energy calculation; Tidal dynamics and structures
of tidal currents. (Lectures: 6)
Prefeasibility analysis: Analysis of location; Physical boundaries of assessment; Static v/s
transect field survey; Location assessment: Farm method and Flux method. (Lectures: 6)
Optimum sizing and modelling of tidal energy system: Modelling of tidal energy conversion
systems; Numerical solution of tidal energy systems; Modelling of a tidal current turbine;
Tidal energy facility size. (Lectures: 6)
Hydrokinetic turbine: Basic principles; emerging designs: Unducted horizontal-axis turbines,
Ducted horizontal-axis turbines, Unducted cross-flow turbines, Ducted cross-flow turbines,
Gorlov helical turbine, Vortex-induced-vibration systems, Venturi systems, Oscillating
hydrofoils, Paddle wheels, Flutter vane, Fan belt; Mooring systems and power transmission.
(Lectures: 6)
Control system: Automatic control system; Control strategies of ocean wave conversion
systems; Reactive power control of tidal turbine; Dynamic control of tidal current turbine;
Power system stability analysis. (Lectures: 6)
Reliability assessment: The failure distribution model; Constant failure rate model; Time
dependent failure model; Assessment of tidal energy system by fault tree analysis.
(Lectures: 6)
Advances in tidal energy systems: Tidal energy system scenario: India and World;
Environmental assessment; Tidal harmonic analysis; Assessment of tidal energy system:
Optimization technique and Game theory; Economic analysis. (Lectures: 6)
Textbook
1. Vikas Khare, Cheshta Khare , Savita Nema, Prashant Baredar (2019). Tidal energy
systems. Elsevier. ISBN: 978-0-12-814881-5.
2. S. K. Chakrabarti (2021). Dynamics of floating offshore structures. World Scientific.
ISBN: 9789814280563
Other references:
1. Lago LI, Ponta FL, Chen L (2010) Advances and trends in hydrokinetic turbine
systems. Energy for Sustainable Development. Volume 14, Issue 4, Pages 287-296.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esd.2010.09.004.
16
Title Offshore Wind Energy Harvesting Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To highlight the complexities of an offshore wind farms and differences with their
onshore counterpart.
2. To introduce the principles of an offshore wind farm design.
3. To introduce principles of management and economics of a wind farm
Learning Outcomes
The students will have understanding of:
1. Aerodynamic, hydrodynamic, and structural loads on offshore wind structures.
2. Design of fixed and floating platforms for wind turbines.
3. Principles of designs of a wind firm, its control, and maintenance.
4. Details of the life-cycle cost and economic feasibility study of an offshore wind farm.
Contents
The offshore environment: Atmospheric wind flow and its characteristic in the boundary layer,
ocean winds, wave theories, wind and wave forces on offshore structures (Lectures: 7)
Fixed and floating offshore platforms, their analysis, and design: Fixed and floating offshore
platforms, mooring lines-their dynamic analysis, wind forces on offshore structures, Design
provisions in API and DNV codes, Fixed and floating offshore wind turbines-their dynamic
analysis, coupled and uncoupled analysis, Fatigue consideration (Lectures: 8)
Floating offshore wind turbines (FOWT): OWT drivetrain and gearbox simulation; Dynamic
behaviour of bearings on offshore wind turbine gearbox: Experimental characterization of
OWT gearbox in operation. (Lectures: 7)
Offshore wind turbine field design: Spatiotemporal wind resource assessment; Bathymetry
and other sea constraints; Strategic planning; Offshore wind farm design; Large eddy
simulation of wind farm aerodynamics. (Lectures: 7)
Operation and Maintenance Modelling: Classification of models; State-of-the-art in modelling;
Decision support tools: vessel-fleet optimization models, cost-benefit evaluation of remote
inspection. (Lectures: 7)
Life-cycle cost and economic feasibility of a floating offshore wind farm: Life-cycle cost
calculation: Economic Map Tools and Restrictions Maps Tools; Life-cycle definition, breakdown
structure of processes, and calculation of costs; CAPEX and OPEX; Net Present Value (NPV);
Internal Rate of Return (IRR); Discounted Pay-Back Period (DPBP); Levelized Cost of Energy
(LCOE); Cost of Power Ratio. (Lectures:7)
Suggested Textbooks:
1. Olimpo Anaya-Lara, John O. Tande, Kjetil Uhlen, Karl Merz (2018) Offshore Wind
Energy Technology. Wiley. ISBN 9781119097785.
2. Joao Cruz, Mairead Atcheson (2016). Floating offshore wind energy (1st Ed). Springer.
ISBN 978-3-319-29398-1.
3. Wiesław Ostachowicz, Malcolm McGugan, Jens-Uwe Schroder-Hinrichs, Marcin Luczak.
MARE-WINT. New Materials and Reliability in Offshore Wind Turbine Technology.
Springer Nature. ISBN 978-3-319-39034-9.
4. Laura Castro-Santos, Vincente Diaz-Casas (2016) Floating Offshore Wind Farms.
Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-27972-5.
5. S. K. Chakrabarti (2021). Dynamics of floating offshore structures. World Scientific.
ISBN: 9789814280563
17
Title Energy Storage Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide understanding of various types of energy storage elements, their principle,
characteristics, and applications
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Design suitable energy storage technology as per demand, location, cost and other
parameters.
2. Test and characterize various batteries/systems under different operating and
ambient conditions
Contents
Fractal - 1
Energy Storage Systems: Introduction of energy storage systems, Energy Demand,
Energy Storage Methods and comparison. (4 Lectures)
Thermal energy storage systems: Basic Principle, Thermal energy storage methods,
Sensible heat storage. (5 Lectures)
Latent heat storage, phase-change materials, operational aspects, Cold thermal energy
storage, Seasonal thermal energy storage (5 Lectures)
Fractal - 2
Mechanical energy storage systems: Introduction, Flywheel energy storage-design and
components (4 Lectures)
Pumped hydropower storage (3 Lectures)
Compressed-air energy storage- Specifications of components, classification. (4 Lectures)
Applications, Technical characteristics in terms of power rating and discharge time,
storage duration, energy efficiency, energy density, cycle life, lifetime, capital cost, etc.
(3 Lectures)
Fractal - 3
Electrochemical/chemical energy storage: Introduction, rechargeable batteries and their
electrochemistry, types of batteries - integration into electrical grids, performance,
characteristics, off-grid systems - sizing - small scale battery storage systems, recycling
technologies, battery testing, battery management, regulations and safety aspects of high
voltage batteries, hydrogen energy storage Hydrogen economy, fuel cell, safety (11
lectures)
Electrical energy storage: Superconducting magnetic energy storage systems - principles,
materials, performance, and characteristics, super capacitors (3 lectures)
Laboratory Classes [12-13 Classes] The experiments for the course include:
Measurement of internal resistance, cold-cranking amps, capacity, state of health, charging
efficiency; Charging and discharging characteristics; Testing of stater-batteries; Self-
discharge and storage; Effect of temperature on – voltage, capacity, internal resistance, self-
discharge, life; Centralized, distributed, hybrid cell balancing; Design and simulation of
charge controllers for battery; Simulation of battery management system; Simulation of
different models using different software like Siemens Simcenter battery; design studio,
Matlab.
Textbook
1. Cabeza,L.F., (2015), Advances in Thermal Energy Storage Systems: Methods and
Applications, Woodhead Publishing
2. Kalaiselvam,S., Parameshwaram R., (2014), Thermal Energy Storage for
Sustainability-Systems Design, Assessment and Applications, Academic Press
18
3. Alami,A.H., (2020), Mechanical Energy Storage for Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Resources, Springer
4. Huggins,R.A., (2014), Energy Storage-Fundamentals, Materials and Applications, 2nd
edition, Springer
Self Learning Material
19
Title Power Plant Engineering Number MEL7XX0
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisite B.Tech
Objectives
This course is designed-
1. to introduce different aspects of power plant engineering such as power plant layout,
operation and safety principles
2. to provide knowledge of the working principle of conversion of different energy
resources into electrical power generation.
Learning Outcomes
The students will acquire-
1. ability to select an appropriate type of power plant for given requirements under
different situations
2. skills for optimization of energy efficiency of power plants with respect to available
resources and energy requirements.
3. ability to analyze the working and layout of power plants and the various components
comprising the plant.
Content:
Introduction to power plant engineering: Sources of energy, National and International status
on power generation. (Lectures: 2)
Thermal Power Plant: Plant layout, Thermal power plant equipment, Types of boilers, the
performance of boilers, supercritical steam generator, the performance of condensers, types
of steam turbines, draught system. (Lectures: 8)
Gas Turbine Power Plant: Classification and construction layout, Principles of closed and open
cycle gas turbines. (Lectures: 4)
Combined cycle power plants: Load type and calculation, Load variation, Use of internal
combustion engine plant, Plant layout and design calculation, combined cycle efficiency.
(Lectures: 5)
Nuclear power plant: Principles of nuclear energy, Elements of nuclear power plants, Types
of nuclear fuel, nuclear reactor, Boiling Water Reactor, Pressurised Water Reactor,
Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor, Fast breeder reactors, Next generation nuclear plant.
(Lectures: 6)
Hydroelectric power plant: Plant layout, water turbine, plant operation, water storage and
flow duration, hydrographs, Low, medium and high head plants, pumped storage plants,
Penstock, water hammer, surge tanks, gates and valves, power house. (Lectures: 6)
Site selection: Selection of for power station, load estimation, load duration curve, load factor,
capacity factor, use factor, diversity factor, demand factor, Effect of variable load on power
plant, selection of the number and size of units. (Lectures: 4)
Economics and Environmental Considerations: Capital cost, Cost of energy production,
Operational cost of power plants, tariffs for electrical energy, Environmental impact, different
types of pollution, fuel availability. (Lectures: 3)
Electrical components of power plants: generator, transformer, speed governing systems,
generator excitation systems, switchyard. (Lectures: 4)
Laboratory Classes [12-13 Classes]
Steam Power Plant: Start-up, Operation and maintenance, Shut down of Steam Power Plant,
Control and monitoring.
Boilers: Efficiency of a steam generator, Analysis of exhaust gas from boiler, Determination
of the heat flux density and the overall heat transfer coefficient in boilers.
Steam Turbine: Demonstration of the function of a steam turbine, Operating Characteristics
of Steam turbine.
Cooling tower: Determination of cooling capacity, Operating Characteristics of Cooling tower
20
Gas Turbine: Determination of specific fuel consumption, Determination of Shaft power and
System efficiency.
Reference Books
1. M. M. Ei-Wakil, Power Plant Technology, Tata McGraw-Hill.
2. P. K. Nag, Power Plant Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill.
3. F. T. Morse, Power Plant Engineering, D. Van Nostran, New York.
Learning Material
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107291/
21
Title Smart Grid Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–2 [4]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide concepts and topics that are relevant to smart grid technologies to facilitate
exploring research opportunities
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand the basic concepts of smart grid development and the critical technologies that
underpin such development, their basic principles, physical constraints, and technological
potentials
Contents
Smart Grid Basics: Evolution of Electric Power Grid and Smart Grid, Objectives, main features
and challenges of smart grid (5 lectures)
Energy Resources: Centralized vs. distributed generation (1 lecture); renewable energy:
solar, wind, hydropower, biomass, geothermal, ocean wave; benefit, costs, and policies of
renewable energy (5 lectures); renewable sources integration – overcoming intermittence;
storage systems technology (4 lectures)
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV): History of EV; PEV challenges and potential solutions (1
lecture); EV and electric power grid; PEV charging infrastructure, challenges and solutions (4
lectures); PEV as an energy storage device and an energy source (V2G) (2 lectures)
Demand-side management: Load profile of the power grid; market pricing (3 lectures); peak
shaving and valley filling; load forecasting (4 lectures); regulations and policies (3 lectures)
Monitoring and Protection: Wide-area monitoring system (WAMS), SCADA and PMU (4
lectures); advanced metering infrastructure (AMI); smart metering (3 lectures);
communication infrastructure and technologies (3 lectures)
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under laboratory
component: Characteristics of solar PV, grid integration of renewable energy sources, effect
of loads on power quality with renewable energy penetration, Inverter-based microgrid,
virtual inertia in inverter-based sources, demand side management, contribution of energy
storage systems to enhance power quality, ancillary services, smart metering, performance
of PMU
Textbook
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power
Systems, Willey-IEEE India Press
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Gay,S.E., Emadi,A., (2005), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel
Cell Vehicles: Fundamentals, Theory, and Design, CRC Press
3. Bansal,R., (2019), Power System Protection in Smart Grid Environment, CRC Press
Self Learning Material
1. The Smart Grid: An Introduction,
http://www.oe.energy.gov/SmartGridIntroduction.htm, Department of Energy, 2008.
22
Title Hydrogen and Methanol Economy Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for MTech, MTech-PhD, PhD Type SSE
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production, storage, their
Utility and infrastructure development.
2. Impart knowledge about the economic and environmental viewpoint of using Hydrogen
and Methanol as fuel sources.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. Proper knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production and related issues.
2. Economic view point of Hydrogen and Methanol as fuel and the related challenges &
opportunities.
Contents
Hydrogen and methanol as fuels: General aspects, Prelude to energy systems, Hydrogen
and Methanol as energy sources, Future energy supply, Economy and Environment,
Sustainability (Lectures: 6)
Hydrogen Production Processes: Properties, production, storage, utilization and safely,
Infrastructure requirement, Hydrogen as a transportation fuel, Hydrogen based fuel cell.
(Lectures: 12)
Methanol Production Processes: Properties, production, storage, transportation and safely,
Infrastructure Requirement, Methanol as fuel and energy carrier, Methanol as automobile,
marine and aviation fuel. (Lectures: 14)
Challenges and opportunities: Indian and global perspectives, Domestic and transportation
application, Affordable Technology development, Policy. (Lectures: 6)
Infrastructure and other issues: Storage and transmission infrastructure, Local distribution,
filling stations and building integrated systems, national and international safety standards,
socio-economic implications. (Lectures: 6)
Textbook
1. G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, G. K. S. Prakash,(2006), Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol
Economy, Wiley‐VCH, Weinheim, Germany.
2. Ball M. and Wietschel M.,(2009) The Hydrogen Economy Opportunities and Challenges,
Cambridge University Press.
Reference Books
1. Scipioni, A. Manzardo, J. Ren, (2017) Hydrogen Economy: Supply Chain, Life Cycle
Analysis and Energy Transition for Sustainability, Academic Press.
2. M. Bertau, H. Offermanns, L. Plass, F. Schmidt, H. Wernicke,(2014) Methanol: The Basic
Chemical and Energy Feedstock of the Future, Springer; 2014
3. Bent Sorensen, 2012, Hydrogen and Fuel Cells: Emerging Technologies and
Applications, Elsevier, Second Edition.
23
Title Plugin Electric Vehicles Number EE7XX0
Departmen
t
Electrical Engineering L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisit
e
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide understanding of various technologies of plugin electric vehicle and
hybrid electric vehicle and their role in smart grid operation
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Design powertrain circuit topology and appropriate control scheme for electric
vehicle
2. Understand and design EV charging infrastructure
Contents
Introduction to EV: Recent development trends, types of electric vehicles (2
lectures)
Powertrain: Concepts of powertrain sizing in EV and PHEV, starting, braking (6
lectures)
Storage systems: Battery types, parameters, battery modeling, battery
management (5 lectures)
Charging Infrastructure: Domestic charging infrastructure, public charging
infrastructure, normal charging station, occasional charging station, fast charging
station, battery swapping station (5 lectures), types of charging: constant voltage,
constant current, pulse charging, inductive, conductive charging (3 lectures)
Vehicle-to-X systems: Vehicle-to-grid, vehicle-to-home (5 lectures), vehicle-to-
building, vehicle-to-vehicle (3 lectures)
Hybrid Electric Vehicle: Configuration of HEV (series, parallel, series-parallel &
complex), power flow control in HEV configurations, control (6 lectures)
Vehicle Communication: Introduction to in-vehicle communications and controller
area network (4 lectures)
PEV integration: Impact on transmission and distribution network (3 lectures)
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under
laboratory component: SoC estimation, control of electric vehicle drives,
regenerative braking, powertrain and vehicle dynamics, EV chargers and their
control, vehicle-to-grid technology, vehicle-to-vehicle technology, EV charging from
solar PV, performance of aggregator
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under
laboratory component:
SoC estimation, control of electric vehicle drives, regenerative braking, powertrain
and vehicle dynamics, EV chargers and their control, vehicle-to-grid technology,
vehicle-to-vehicle technology, EV charging from solar PV, performance of
aggregator, Use of simulation tools (MATLAB, SIEMENS EV related softwares) to
simulate different subsystems of EV and different scenarios.
Textbook
1. Husain,I., (2011), Electric and Hybrid Vehicles Design Fundamentals, 2nd
Edition, CRC Press
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Emadi,A., (2011), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel
Cell Vehicles Fundamentals, Theory and Design, 2nd Edition, CRC Press
3. Larminie,J., Lowry,J., (2003), Electric Vehicle Technology Explained, Wiley
Self Learning Material
24
1. Jain,A.K., Electric Vehicles - Part 1, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Electrical Engineering, IIT Delhi,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102121/
2. Kumar,P., Majhi,S., Introduction to Hybrid and Electric Vehicles, NPTEL Course
Material, Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, IIT
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/103/108103009/
25
Title Energy Economics and
Policy
Number HSS7XX0
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-0 [1]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To introduce basics of energy economics and demands.
Learning Outcomes
1. Knowledge of energy classification, calculation, and audit.
2. Knowledge of demand analysis and management.
Contents
1. Energy as economic resources: classification of energy resources; measurement of
energy; energy accounting. (Lectures: 7)
2. Energy demand: basic concepts in economics; descriptive analysis of energy
demand; decomposition analysis and parametric approach; demand side
management; load management. (Lectures: 7)
Text Books
1. Alessandro Rubino Alessandro Sapio Massimo La Scala Michelle Hallack (2020)
Handbook of Energy Economics and Policy (1st Ed). Elsevier Academic Press. ISBN:
9780128147122.
Online course Material
1. “Energy Economics and policy” by Prof. Shyamasree Dasgupta on NTPEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106161/
26
Title Materials for Electrochemical Energy
Conversion and Storage
Number
Department Physics and Metallurgical & Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 [2]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide the student with an extended knowledge of the basic principles and recent
advances in Energy Storage materials and associated technologies for consumer electronics
to high-power applications.
2. Provide the students with the role of materials in energy storage technologies.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain knowledge on:
1. Different modes of energy conversion and storage with respect to scale, cost, energy and
power density
2. Structure processing property performance relationship of the energy materials developed
over time.
Contents
Introduction: Overview of electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices, Basic
terminology, Classification, Applications. (Offered by Physics) (Lectures: 2)
Batteries: Introduction to Batteries, primary and secondary batteries, Solid-state and liquid
electrolyte batteries, Lead acid batteries, Nickel Cadmium Batteries, Li-ion and Li-Polymer
batteries, Intercalation and Conversion Materials, Battery Capacity and Life, Micro-batteries,
Thin film batteries, Materials for high-energy density 2D and 3D batteries (Offered by Physics)
(Lectures: 12)
Fuel cells: Principle and types, performance characteristics and efficiency of fuel cell, Proton
exchange fuel cells, Solid oxide fuel cells, Types of solid oxide fuel cells: High and intermediate
temperature, Single chamber solid oxide fuel cells. Polymer electrolyte fuel cells, Acid/alkaline
fuel cells, phosphoric acid fuel cell, molten carbonate fuel cell, fuel cell stack, hydrogen storage
(Offered by MT) (Lectures: 10)
Supercapacitors: Difference between Capacitor and Supercapacitor, Electrolyte and Electrode
materials, electric double layer capacitors, Challenges and Applications (Offered by MT)
(Lectures: 4)
Textbook
1. Cheong K. Y., Impellizzeri G and Fraga M. A. (2018) Emerging Materials for Energy
Conversion and Storage, 1st Edition, Elsevier
Reference Book
1. Rosen M. A. (2012) Energy Storage, Nova
Online Course Materials
1. Prof. Bazant M., MITopencourseware: Electrochemical Energy Systems, MIT Course Number
10.626 / 10.426, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemical-engineering/10-626-
electrochemical-energy-systems-spring-2014/
2. Prof. Pal K., Selection Of Nanomaterials For Energy Harvesting And Storage Application,
NPTEL Course Material, Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/107/112107283/
27
Title Hydropower Number MEL7XX0
Departmen
t
Mechanical Engineering, electrical
Engineering, Civil & Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisit
e
Objectives:
The Instructor will:
1. Describe the role of the hydropower and working principles of small- and large-scale
hydropower plants.
2. Provide overview of the practical design of hydropower structures including mechanical
and electrical equipment.
3. Introduce students to geotechnical, mechanical, and electrical engineering aspects of
conventional large dams.
Learning Outcomes:
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Formulate and analyze technical solutions for design, and operation of hydropower
plants.
2. Analyze a technical problems connected to the hydroelectric power industry.
3. Compare the design of dams, mechanical, electric and electronic equipment.
4. Implement design details of embankment dam, components of face rockfill dams and
concrete gravity dam, and basis of dam foundation design.
Fractal 1 (ME)
 Introduction: Hydropower resource, potential and market, Hydropower sites, Types of
hydropower plants. (Lectures: 2)
 Large hydropower: Run-of-River Hydropower, Dams and Barrages, Dam types
(Lectures: 3)
 Hydropower turbines, Classification and working principles, Impulse and reaction
turbines; Propeller and Kaplan Turbines, Deriaz turbine. (Lectures: 5)
 Tidal power: Tidal barrage power plant, operation and design, Tidal lagoons, Barrage
construction techniques, Turbine speed regulation. (Lectures: 4)
Fractal 2 (EE)
 Hydropower Generators: Generator poles and rotational speed, orientation, types
(Lectures: 2)
 Small Hydropower: Small, mini, and micro hydropower plant, generators for small
hydro power plants (Lectures: 3)
 Electronic Control of Hydropower: Phase angle control, relay switched on loads, Mark-
Space ratio controller (Lectures: 3)
 Pumped Storage Hydropower: Pumped storage hydropower plant, turbines, motors
(Lectures: 3)
 Hydropower House: Classification, equipment, accessories, layout, components, sizing
(Lectures: 3)
Fractal 2 (CIE)
● Site investigation techniques: Geological environments: rocks and soils; Geological,
geotechnical, and geophysical investigation; Trenching and drilling (Lectures: 2)
● Design of embankment dams: freeboard; Slope protection; Embankment crest details;
Dimensioning and tolerances; Conduits through embankments; Flood control
structures; Seismic stability analysis of embankments; Liquefaction of dam
embankments and foundations. (Lectures: 4)
● Concrete face rockfill dams and Concrete gravity dams: Selection of dam types; Rockfill
zones; Concrete face; Construction aspects; Settlements, and displacements of the face
slab, and joints; Leakage; Strength and compressibility of rock foundations; Strength
of concrete in the dam; Strength of the concrete-rock contact; Silt and ice load
(Lectures: 4)
28
● Foundation preparation: General foundation preparation for embankment dams; Cutoff
foundation for embankment dams; Width and batter slopes; Slope modification;
Foundation preparation for concrete gravity dams. (Lectures: 4)
Textbook
 Breeze,P., (2018), Hydropower, Academic Press
 Pandey,B., Karki,A., (2017), Hydroelectric Energy, Renewable Energy and the
Environment, CRC Press
 Robin Fell, Patrick MacGregor, David Stapledon, Graeme Bell (2005) Geotechnical
Engineering of Dams. A. A. Balkema publishers. ISBN 04 1536 440 x.
29
Title Selected Topics in Distributed Generation Number EE7XX0
Departmen
t
Electrical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisit
e
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide salient concepts of DG operation and control in both grid connected and
autonomous modes
2. Provide exposure to the challenges related to stability, grid integration, and ancillary
services in distributed generation
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Develop control schemes for distributed generators to operate in grid connected and
autonomous mode
2. Understand various challenges and propose solutions related to stability, grid integration
and ancillary services in distributed generation
Contents
Distributed generation: Introduction, DG types, concept of inertia and frequency response,
flexibility issues, ramping issues (3 lectures)
Control of distributed generation: Modelling and control of distributed energy sources such
as solar PV, wind energy, diesel generator (10 lectures)
Microgrids: Concept of microgrid, microgrid benefits, typical structures and configurations
of various microgrids (3 lectures), control of converters in DC and AC microgrids (4
lectures), active and reactive power control, voltage and frequency control of inverter-
based sources (3 lectures), virtual synchronous generators (2 lectures)
Stability: Stability issues with weak grid integration and in microgrid operation (4 lectures)
Other challenges in grid integration: Power quality requirements, DG support under
abnormal grid conditions (3 lectures), issues related to islanding and reverse power flow,
network congestion (5 lectures), and protection (2 lectures)
Ancillary services: Ancillary services with DGs, control for ancillary services, virtual power
plants (3 lectures)
Textbook
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power
Systems, Willey-IEEE India Press
2. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
3. Bevrani,H., Francois,B., Ise,T., (2017), Microgrid Dynamics and Control, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
30
Title Advanced Waste Water
Treatment
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D., Ph.D. Type SSE
Prerequisite None
Objective
The instructor will:
1 Impart comprehensive knowledge of industrial and municipal wastewater.
1. Discuss mechanism and methodologies for waste water treatment.
2. Discuss case studies
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the:
1 Comprehensive knowledge of the wastewater treatment.
1. Knowledge of advanced methodologies such as waste water management, recycle
and reuse.
Contents
Introduction: Waste water engineering: an overview, characterisation of waste water and
monitoring of industrial and municipal waste water, environmental impacts of waste water
constituents. (4 lectures)
Conventional Waste Water Treatment: Existing unit operations and processes, basic
philosophy of water treatment plants; physio-chemical treatment methods: (i) Screening,
(ii) conventional filtration (iii) coagulation, (iv) flocculation, (v) floatation (vi) Clari-
flocculation (vii) sedimentation, (viii) sand filtration, etc. (10 lectures)
Aerobic and Anaerobic Suspended and Attached Growth Waste Water Treatment Processes:
Aerated lagoon, activated sludge systems, trickling filter, sequential batch reactor,
fluidized
bed bioreactors, Up-flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) and hybrid Up-flow Anaerobic
Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactors. (8 lectures)
Advanced Treatment Processes: Membrane Filtration, reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration,
nanofiltration and electrodialysis; wet air oxidation, adsorption and ion-exchange; Wet-
land and root-zone treatment of industrial and municipal wastes; Design of sludge drying
beds, thermal and biological processes for sludge and land fillings. Membrane Reactors,
New Technologies for Waste Water Disinfection. (12 lectures)
Water Recycling and Reuse: Different unit operations for water recycling depending on end
use, recovery of valuables from waste water, zero liquid discharge (ZLD). (8 lectures)
Waste Water Treatment Design Lab (28 hrs)
Clarifier; Aerator; Sand filtration system; Municipal waste water system; Grey water
treatment system; Sewage water treatment system; Industrial waste water systems; Pond
water treatment.
Text Book
1. Burton F.L., Tchobanoglous G., Stensel H.D., 2017, Waste Water Engineering
Treatment and Reuse, 4thed.,Tata McGraw-Hill.
2. Arceivala S.J. and Asolekar S.R., 2007, Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control
and Reuse, 3rd Ed., Tata McGraw Hill.
Reference Books
1. Henze M., van-Loosdrecht M.C.M., Ekama G.A. and Brdjanovic D., 2008, Biological
Wastewater Treatment: Principles, Modelling and Design, IWA publishing.
2. Sincero A.P. and Sincero G.A., 1996, Environmental Engineering – A Design
Approach, Prentice-Hall.
Online Course Material
1. Tiwari M K, Wastewater treatment and recycling, NPTEL course material,
Department of Civil Engineering, IIT Kharagpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105178/
31
Title Fuel Cell Technology Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about the fuel cell technology.
2. Discuss the fundamentals of deferent fuel cells.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. Comprehensive knowledge about fuel cell technology.
2. The ability to design different types of cells.
Contents
Basics of Cell Technology: Principles of fuel cells, Fuel cells systems and staking,
applications, performance study, electrochemistry and thermodynamics of fuel cells. [6
lectures]
Fuel cell kinetics: electrode kinetics, catalysis in fuel cells, activation energy, reaction
equilibrium, exchange currents and electrocatalysis, design principles of catalyst-electrode,
Sabatier principle. [6 lectures]
Charge and mass transport: resistance and voltage loss, electrical driving force, fuel cell
electrolytes, diffusive and conductive transport, convective transport. [6 lectures]
Modelling and characterization: Theory and governing equations, basic fuel cell model, 1D
model, CFD application in modelling, characterization techniques of fuel cells, physical and
chemical methods. [6 lectures]
Proton-exchange membrane (PEM) Fuel Cell: Cell components, material properties and
processes; membrane layer, current collector and gas delivery, catalyst action, design
issues, high temperature and reverse operation, degradation and lifetime. [9 lectures]
Other Fuel cells: Solid Oxide Fuel Cell(SOFC), Phosphoric acid fuel cell (PAFC), Alkaline fuel
cell (AFC), Solid acid fuel cell (SAFC), Molten-carbonate fuel cell (MCFC), Microbial fuel cell,
etc., Environmental impact of fuel cells, fuel cell vehicles, building-integrated fuel cells. [9
lectures]
Textbook
1. Andrew L. Dicks, David A. J. Rand, 2018, Fuel Cell Systems Explained, Willey, Third
Edition.
2. Ryan O'Hayre, Suk-Won Cha, Whitney Colella, Fritz B. Prinz, 2005, Fuel Cell
Fundamentals, Willey, Third Edition.
Reference Books
1. Bent Sorensen, 2012, Hydrogen and Fuel Cells: Emerging Technologies and
Applications, Elsevier, Second Edition.
2. Frano Barbir, 2013, PEM Fuel Cells: Theory and Practice, Elsevier Inc., Second Edition.
3. Ryan O'Hayre, Suk-Won Cha, Whitney Colella, Fritz B. Prinz, 2009, Fuel Cell
Fundamentals, Wiley, Second Edition.
32
Title Electrochemical Conversion and Storage Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Impart the knowledge of electrochemical engineering, Working principle, materials
and characterization of electrochemical conversion for energy production.
2. Introduce the mechanism to store energy.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. Comprehensive knowledge about electrochemical process.
2. Advanced knowledge about energy production via electrochemical process and store
it efficiently.
Contents
Introduction: basics of electrochemical Conversions and Storage, devices and Principles,
over view of fuel cells, Photo-electrochemical conversion and cells. [5 lectures]
Batteries for energy storage: primary and secondary batteries, limitations of battery
performance, Lead Acid Battery, Nickel-Metal Hydride (Ni-MH) Rechargeable Batteries,
Lithium-Ion Rechargeable Batteries, Liquid- Redox Rechargeable Batteries. [10 lectures]
Electrochemical supercapacitor: introduction to supercapacitor, types and structures,
Transport Properties, electric double-layer capacitor, physical/elcrochemical processes in
supercapacitors, diffuse layer, pseudocapacitor. [11 lectures]
Electrodialysis: introduction to electrodialysis and reverse electrodialysis, control
parameters, effect of flow structure. [4 lectures]
Electrochemical Hydrogen Production: Introduction to electrolysis, electrolysers and
hydrogen production, PEM water electrolysers, electrochemical reforming of alcohol,
perspectives of hydrogen electroproduction techniques. [12 lectures]
Textbook
1. Vladimir S. Bagotsky, Alexander M. Skundin, Yurij M. Volfkovich, 2015, Electrochemical
Power Sources: Batteries, Fuel Cells, and Supercapacitors, Wiley.
2. Jiujun Zhang, Lei Zhang, Hansan Liu, Andy Sun, Ru-Shi Liu, 2011, Electrochemical
Technologies for Energy Storage and Conversion, Wiley-VCH, First Edition.
3. Allen J. Bard, Larry R. Faulkner, 2001, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and
Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Second Edition.
Reference Books
1. Keith Scott, 2020, Electrochemical Methods for Hydrogen Production, RSC, UK.
2. Stanley W. Angrist, 1982, Direct Energy Conversion , Allyn and Bacon Inc.
33
Title Environmental Aspects of
Power Plant
Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-0 [1]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D., Ph.D. Type SSE
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To provide basic knowledge of combustion and conversion technologies.
2. To make students familiar with emissions, pre- and post-combustion control
technologies and waste management techniques.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
1. Identifying the issues and appropriately choose the right pollution control techniques
for gas and particle phase emissions.
2. Assessing the efficiency of conventional as well as emerging combustion technologies
targeting pollution reduction.
Contents
Introduction: Types of emissions; types of pollutants (SOx, NOx, trace elements and
other Coal Combustion Products) and their impacts; Emission standards (Lectures: 2)
Combustion Technologies: Gasification; Types of gasifier; Gasification vs Combustion;
Fluidized bed combustion (FBC); Concept of Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle
(ICC); IGCC vs pulverized coal combustion (PCC) (Lectures: 5)
Pre- and Post-combustion control: Flue gas desulfurization (FGD); NOx and Sox
treatments (low NOx burners, flue gas recirculation and SCR); Particulate matter control
systems (Electrostatic precipitators, mechanical collectors, and other devices (particulate
scrubbers, baghouse filters, fabric filters etc.)) (Lectures: 5)
Ash handling: Ash (fly ash, bottom ash, pond ash, FBC ash, boiler slag, FGD ash);
Scrubber slurry; Ash handling and sustainability practices, leaching aspects. (Lectures:
2)
Text Books
1. Fuels and Fuel Technology, F. Peter, A. Wheatan & Co. Ltd., First Edition, 1965.
2. Fuels and Combustion, S. Sarkar, Orient Longman, Second Edition, 1990.
3. Hydrogen and Syngas Production and Purification Technologies, Ke Liu, C. Song, and
V. Subramani, John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
4. The Chemistry and Technology of Coal, J. G. Speight, CRC Press, 2013.
Online course Material
34
Title Transmission Infrastructure Number EE7XX0
Departmen
t
Electrical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE
Prerequisit
e
Smart Grid
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide knowledge related to infrastructure in various modes of power transmission
such as underground, marine, and overhead.
2. Provide knowledge related to design, installation, and maintenance of the transmission
infrastructure.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Select appropriate transmission infrastructure needed for transmission of electric
power based on various factors.
2. Design, install, and maintain power transmission infrastructure.
Contents
Overhead transmission lines: Overhead line routing, aerial survey, ground survey,
overhead line foundations, soil investigation, foundation types, foundation design,
support structures, steel lattice towers, tower testing, overhead line fittings, suspension
clamps, sag adjusters, bi-metal connectors, conductor loads, lightning, surge diverters,
insulator arcing horn co-ordination, aerodynamic phenomena, transmission voltage level
clearances, wooden poles, distribution voltage clearances, overhead line maintenance,
environmental considerations (18 lectures)
Underground cables: Types of cable, insulation and conductor materials, air cable
ampacity, underground cable ampacity, short circuit and its effect, thermal &
electromechanical stresses, cable termination and joints, pulling the cable, installing
cable racks, conduits, cable supports, cable tray and trenches, cable testing, steps for
fault location, fault location methods (12 lectures)
Marine cables: Introduction, marine survey, cable routing, cable system design
parameters, cable design parameters, cable accessories, cable installation, cable
materials & accessories, cable joints and terminations, inspections and testing,
maintenance and failure investigation (12 lectures)
Textbook
1. Kiessling,F., Nefzger,P., Nolasco,J.F., Kaintzyk,U., (2003), Overhead Power Lines
Planning Design Construction, 4th Edition, Springer
2. Ganguli,S.K., Kohli,V., (2016), Power Cable Technology, CRC Press
3. Worzyk,T., (2009), Submarine Power Cables Design, Installation, Repair,
Environmental Aspects, Springer
4. Bayliss,C., Hardy,B., (2012), Transmission and Distribution Electrical Engineering,
4th Edition, Newnes publications
Self Learning Material
35
Detailed Course Content of M. Tech Elective Courses (ME)
Title Power System Protection Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will provide knowledge of:
1. Various protection schemes and their applications in power industry
2. Relay coordination, instrument transformers
3. Numerical protection schemes based on signal processing techniques
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Design/propose protection schemes for various power system components based on
digital signal processing
2. Design relay coordination systems in distribution and transmission
Contents
Overview of Power System Protection: Architecture of protection system, evolution of
relays, zones of protections, concept of primary and back-up protection (2 lectures)
Overcurrent Protection: Principles of fuse and overcurrent protection and application to
feeder and motor protection, relay coordination in distribution system (6 lectures)
Distance Protection: Principles of distance relaying (2 lectures) and application to
transmission system protection, relay coordination (5 lectures)
Differential Protection: Principles of differential protection (2 lectures) and application to
transformer, bus bar and generator armature winding protection (5 lectures)
Introduction to Digital Relaying: Sampling, concept of moving window, signal
conditioning, signal processing (4 lectures)
Instrument Transformer: Current and voltage transformers in power system protection
(6 lectures)
Circuit breakers: Arc initiation and quenching, oil circuit breakers, air blast circuit
breakers vacuum circuit breakers, SF6 circuit breakers (5 lectures), current chopping,
reverse recovery voltage (3 lectures)
Lightning arresters: Principle of operation and types (2 lectures)
Textbook
1. Singh, L.P., (2017), Digital Protection: Protective Relaying from Electromechanical to
Microprocessor, 2nd Edition, New Age International Publications
2. Ram,B., Vishwakarma,D.N., (2017), Power System Protection and Switchgear, 2nd
Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Publications.
3. Phadke,A.G., Thorp,J.S., (2009), Computer relaying for Power System, 2nd Edition,
John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Publications
Self Learning Material
1. Soman,S.A., Power System Protection, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101039/
36
Title Cyber-Physical Security in Smart Grid Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide exposure to the various layers of smart grid architecture and security issues related
to vital components of smart grid
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand various cyber layers of smart grid and the threats to the physical components,
and design a secure system
Contents
Introduction: Physical components of a grid, communication in smart grid, self-
monitoring, self-healing, vulnerabilities of smart grid, cyber-physical security (5 lectures)
Security Architecture of Smart Grids: Security architecture of smart Grid and its layers,
typical SCADA network levels, conceptual control system with layering, robust and
resilient control, secure network routing, management of information security, user
patching (6 lectures)
Advanced Metering Infrastructure and Security Issues: Smart meters, customer gateway,
AMI communication network, AMI head-end, AMI security threats, interactions, malicious
code planted in the system, denial of service, insider attacks, unauthorized access (4
lectures)
SCADA System Security: Introduction to SCADA, Security Issues in SCADA, Public
Information Availability, Platform Vulnerabilities, Network Configuration Vulnerabilities,
Network Perimeter Vulnerabilities, DNP3 Threats (5 lectures)
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV) Security Issues: Introduction to PEV Security, Privacy of
movement, Secure payment, Critical Infrastructure and Physical Security, Communication
issues in PEVs (4 lectures)
Smart Grid Domain Security: IEEE standards for smart grid security, IEEE 802.11, IEEE
802.15.4, IEEE 802.16, Bluetooth and BLE/BT5.0, ZigBee, Z-Wave, Gateway Component,
FMEA, STAMP, HAZOP, Smart Grid Information Security (SGIS), SGIS Risk Impact Level
(SGIS-RIL) (6 lectures)
Blockchain for Smart Grid: Blockchain: Smart contract, applications of blockchain
technology to energy; Energy trading: Transition towards blockchain-based electricity
trading market, Internet of Energy (IoE); Distributed Energy Resources: Decentralized
operation of interdependent power and energy networks based on Blockchain and security,
Electric vehicles: Blockchain for decentralized optimization of energy sources: EV charging
coordination via blockchain-based charging power quota trading, Microgrid: microgrid
monitoring and control using blockchain. (12 lectures)
Textbook
1. Hossain,E., Han,Z., Poor,H.V., (2012), Smart Grid Communications and Networking,
Cambridge University Press
2. Berger,L.T., Iniewski,K., (2012), Smart Grid Applications, Communications, and Security,
John Wiley and Sons Publications
3. Shafie-khan,M., (2020), Blockchain-based Smart Grids, Academic Press
Self Learning Material
37
Title Energy Harvesting Number PHL6XX0
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide the student with an extended knowledge of the basic principles and recent
advances in Energy harvesting technologies for low-power applications including
self-powered or autonomous systems.
2. Provide the students with the role of materials in energy harvesting technologies
with a focus on miniaturized and microfabricated devices.
Learning Outcomes
The students will:
1. Develop an understanding of basic principle, concept, working mechanism and
applications of various energy harvesting devices.
2. Develop an understanding to design new energy harvesting systems.
Contents
Micro Photovoltaic Module Energy Harvesting: p-n Junction and Crystalline Si Solar Cells,
Amorphous Silicon Solar Cell, CIGS and CdTe Solar Cell Development, Polymer Solar Cell,
Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSC), Perovskite Solar Cells, Monolithically Integration of
Solar Cells with IC, Low-Power Micro Photovoltaic Systems, Maximum Power Point
Tracking (Lectures : 14)
Mechanical Energy Harvesting: Energy Harvesting from Macro to Micro to Nano,
Piezoelectric MEMS Energy Harvesters, Nano-Piezoelectric Generator, Piezoelectric
Cantilever Generator, Piezoelectric Transducers. New-generation Triboelectric
Nanogenerators. (Lectures: 8)
Thermal Energy Harvesting: Overview of Nanoscale Heat Conduction and the Seebeck
Effect, Thermoelectric energy harvesting and Power Generation, Thermoelectric figures
of merit, Novel nanostructured Thermoelectric materials and devices, Thermal energy
harvesting using pyroelectric materials, Thermodynamic cycles for Pyroelectric energy
harvesting, Nanostructured and micro-scale materials and devices. (Lectures: 14)
Textbook
1. Briand, D., Yeatman, E., Roundy, S., Micro Energy Harvesting Wiley, 2015.
2. Shashank, P., Inman, D. J., Energy Harvesting Technologies, Springer, 2009.
Self-Learning Material
1. Elvin, N., Erturk, A., Advances in Energy Harvesting Methods, Springer, 2013.
2. Jaffe, R., and Taylor, W., Physics of Energy, MIT open course,
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-21-the-physics-of-energy-fall-2009/
3.
Preparatory Course Material
4. Pal, K., Selection of Nanomaterials for Energy harvesting and Energy Storage
Applications, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107283/
38
Title Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion Process Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite Thermodynamics
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide understanding of Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) cycles, hybrid
OTEC systems.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the:
1. Proper knowledge about Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) cycles and hybrid
OTEC technologies.
2. Ability to understand OTEC process design challenges.
vi Contents
Ocean as a Heat Engine: Concepts of ocean thermal energy, Favourable temperature
difference, OTEC history. (2 lectures)
OTEC Cycles: Closed OTEC cycles, Open OTEC cycle, Flow diagrams, Comparison of OTEC
Cycles, Products of OTEC: electricity, desalinated water, cold water for air-conditioning
etc., Hybrid OTEC systems. (6 lectures)
OTEC Process Design: System components, Heat exchangers, evaporators, Pumps,
Turbines, Piping. (6 lectures)
Textbook
1. Takahashi, Patrick and Trenka, Andrew, (1996) Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion, Ist
ed., Wiley.
Reference Books
1. Lockerby,R.W., (1981) Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC), US Department of
Energy, United States.
39
Title Optics for Solar Energy Applications Number PHL6XX0
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
The students will gain
1. Knowledge to understand the issues related to optics in solar thermal applications.
2. Knowledge in designing and analyzing optics for imaging and non-imaging optics.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Show a basic familiarity with the Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) plants.
2. To design as individual optical concentrators and Optical Field Design.
Contents
Basics of Maxwell equation: Review of Electromagnetic theory ( 2 Lectures)
Wave Optics: Polarization (Brewster Angle) and Fresnel Coefficients, Interference,
Diffraction and Fermat Principle in Optics (5 Lectures)
Ray Optics: Optical Momentum, The Eikonal Equation , The Ray Equation, Point Spread
Function (PSF), Optical Transfer Function (OTF) (6 Lectures)
Design of Two-Dimensional Concentrators: Thin lens formula, Concentrators for Sources at
a Finite Distance and Tubular Receivers. (6 Lectures)
Radiation and Detectors: Black-body Radiation, Radiometry, Photometry, and Radiation
Heat Transfer, Radiation detectors: Spectrometer, Power meter and Flux meter ( 7
Lectures)
Sun-earth geometry: Derivation of incidence angles and tracking algorithms for the
principal solar tracking modes and Derivation of projected incidence angles for stationary
concentrators ( 3 Lectures)
Design of Nonimaging Optics: Imaging Properties of the Design Method Nonimaging
Applications, Conservation of Étendue, The Winston–Welford Design Method, Tailored Edge
Ray Concentrators Designed for Maximum, Concentration , Tailored Edge, Ray
Concentrators Designed for Lower Concentration , Fresnel Primaries and Applications of
Nonimaging Concentrators. (7 Lectures)
Applications to Solar Energy Concentration high concentration: Design of Solar thermal
fields, Design of Heliostat field, Parabolic Trough(PT), Linear Fresnel Reflector (LFR) and
Design of Compound Parabolic Collectors (CPC), Ray Tracing Technique for Field Design ( 6
Lectures)
Textbook
1. Welford W. T and Winston, R., High Collection Non-Imaging Optics, Academic Press 1989.
2. Hecht, E., Optics, 4th Ed., Pearson Education 2002.
Reference book
1. Born, M and Wolf, E., Principles of Optics, 7th Ed., Cambridge 1999.
2. Pedrotti, F. L., Pedrotti, L.M and Pedrotti, S. L., Introduction to Optics, 3 rd Ed., Pearson
2008.
3. Donald C. O’Shea: Elements of Modern Optical Design. John Wiley & Sons, 1985
4. Julio Chaves: Introduction to Nonimaging Optics. CRC Press, 2008.
Self-Learning Material
Preparatory Course Material
40
Title Theory of Vibrations Number MEL7XX0
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D., Ph.D. Type ME
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of mechanical
vibrations
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide the approach adopted for analyzing the structural dynamic characteristics and
dynamic response of uniform and non-uniform structural elements, like beams.
2. The approach is applicable for structural dynamic analysis of any structure.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Analyze the vibration characteristics of non-uniform beams.
2. Thorough understanding of approximate methods used in the structural dynamic
analysis.
Contents
Introduction: Discrete and continuous systems, SDOF, Types of Damping, Frequency
response, Time response, Beating phenomenon, Response to impulse loading, Convolution
integral, Numerical integration, Newmark-β method, Wilson-θ method [Lectures 9].
Rayleigh’s Method: Approximate evaluation of natural frequency, improved Rayleigh’s
method [Lectures 4].
Stiffness and flexibility influence coefficients, finite element stiffness of beam elements, Static
condensation [Lectures 5].
Hamilton’s principle, Lagrange’s equations [Lectures 3].
Linear conservative natural systems: Symmetric eigenvalue problem, Modal analysis,
Systems with proportional damping, structural damping (complex stiffness) [Lectures 4].
Continuous parameter systems: Longitudinal vibration of bars, bending vibration of
beams, torsion vibration [Lectures 4].
Differential Eigenvalue Problem: Admissible function, Comparison function, Eigen
function [Lectures 2].
Positive definite system, self adjoint property [Lectures 2].
Natural modes of vibration: Mode shapes and natural frequencies [Lectures 2].
Approximate methods: Transfer Matrix method, Rayleigh’s quotient, Rayleigh-Ritz method,
Galerkin method [Lectures 5].
Response to excitation: Mode summation, Mode acceleration [Lectures 2].
Reference Books
1. Meirovitch, L., Principles and Techniques of Vibrations, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall
2. Meirovitch, L., Analytical Methods in Vibration Analysis, Macmillan
3. Clough, R.W., and Penzien, J., Dynamics of Structures, McGraw Hill
Online course Material
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105101006/
41
Title Offshore Geo-technology Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To familiarize students with the dynamics of offshore environment.
2. To introduce methods of soil and site investigation.
3. To introduce designs, types, and analyses of piled foundation, shallow foundation, and
anchoring systems.
4. To introduce specific consideration of soil structure interaction of on-bottom and pipelines
and risers.
5. To provide overview of geo-hazards.
Learning outcomes:
1. Detailed knowledge of geophysical, geotechnical investigation, laboratory test and use
of centrifuge modelling.
2. Understanding of soil response under static and dynamic loads.
3. Knowledge of the analysis and design of shallow foundation, piled foundation, anchoring
system and on-bottom pipelines and risers.
4. Understanding of marine slope failure and slides.
Contents:
Offshore environment: Marine geology, Plate tectonics, Continental self, Marine-
sediments, Geotechnical characteristics, Ocean wind and waves, currents, wave theories,
hydrodynamic forces (Lectures 7).
Offshore site and soil investigation: Geophysical and Geotechnical investigations; Soil
classifications and tests- undrained tri-axial compression test, undrained strength; cyclic
loading test, failure under cyclic loading, Centrifuge modelling [Lectures 7].
Offshore foundations: Shallow and deep foundations and their applications, Design of
offshore foundations as per API and DNV codes, Pile drivability and dynamic monitoring,
Capacity of driven piles, Installation piled and shallow foundations in fine grained and
permeable sediments, Stability of shallow foundations, Dynamic analysis of vertical and
inclined pile foundations, Impedance function of piles and frequency domain analysis
[lectures 10].
Anchoring systems: Buoyant platforms and mooring systems, Mooring line analysis and
forces on anchors, Types of anchors and their design; API and DNV code provisions for
anchor design, Dynamic effects on anchor and uplift of anchors, Dynamically penetrating
anchors [Lectures 7].
Pipeline and riser geotechnics: Geotechnical inputs to pipeline design; Design issues and
code provisions; Soil structure interaction for on-bottom pipelines and risers, Secondary
stabilization [Lecture 6]
Offshore geo-hazard: Types of marine geo-hazard and their identification, Submarine
slope failures and slides, probabilistic hazard analysis [Lectures 5].
Text Books:
1. Mark Randolph, Susan Gourvenec (2011). Offshore Geotechnical Engineering. Spon
Press (Taylor & Francis), ISBN13: 978-0-415-47744-4(hbk).
2. Paolo Boccotti (2000). Wave Mechanics for Ocean Engineering (1st Ed), Elsevier
Science. ISBN: 9780080543727 (eBook)
42
Title Rock Mechanics and Rock
Engineering
Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To understand fundamentals of stress-train behavior of isotropic and anisotropic
rocks under different conditions
2. To understand limits of rock strength and analysis of rock failure conditions
3. To understand the influence anisotropy under at different scales
4. Introduction of use of rock mechanics in tunneling, mining engineering, and reservoir
geomechanics
Learning outcomes
1. Knowledge of geological and engineering classification of rocks.
2. Detailed knowledge of failure criteria and influence of ambient conditions
3. Knowledge of laboratory- and field-based stress measurement techniques
4. Understanding of isotropic and anisotropic rock deformation
5. Knowledge of tunneling in isotropic and anisotropic rocks
6. Knowledge of natural and artificial support system in underground excavations
7. Knowledge of wellbore stability and hydraulic fracturing
Contents
Classification and index properties of rocks: Geological classification of rocks; Index
properties of rocks; Porosity; Density; Hydraulic conductivity and permeability; Strength;
Slaking and durability; Sonic velocity; Classification of rock masses [Lectures 4].
Rock strength and failure criteria: Modes of failure; Laboratory strength tests; Stress-
strain behaviors in compression; Application of complete stress-strain curve; The Mohr-
Coulomb failure criterion; Hoek-Brown failure criterion; Effect of size, water, and anisotropy
on strength [Lectures 6].
Initial stresses in rocks and their measurement: Estimating the initial stresses;
Techniques for measurement of in-situ stresses; Determination of SHmin from leak-off tests;
Wellbore failure and the magnitude of SHmax; Drilling-induced tensile fracture and magnitude
of SHmax; Estimation of rock strength from breakouts [Lectures 5].
Planes of weakness in rocks: Joint orientation; Joint roughness; Relationship between
displacement and strength; Effect of water pressure [Lectures 5].
Deformability of rocks: Elastic and non-elastic behavior; Measurement of deformability
properties by static tests; Measurement of deformability properties by dynamic
measurement; Fractured rock; Influence of time on rock deformation [Lectures 6].
Rock mechanics for tunneling: Opening in competent rocks; Horizontally layered rocks;
Rock with inclined layers; Plastic behavior around tunnels; Time dependent behavior of
tunnels [Lectures 5].
Rock mechanics for mining engineering: Natural support: Pillar design approach, Pillar
strength equation, Model of pillar failure, Pillar stabilization; Artificial support: Rock support
interaction analysis, Classification, Primary reinforcement, Secondary support system; Rock
blasting process, control, and optimization [Lectures 5].
Rock mechanics for hydrocarbon reservoir: Tectonic stress field; Pore pressure
measurement; Mechanical properties and stress data from laboratory analysis and field
data; Concepts of critically stressed crust; Basics of hydraulic fracturing; Wellbore stability
[Lectures 6].
Text Books
43
1. Richard E. Goodman (1989) Introduction to Rock Mechanics (2nd Ed). Wiley. ISBN-
10: 0471812005.
2. Mark D. Zoback. (2007) Reservoir Geomechncs. Cambridge University Press. ISBN-
978-0-521-77069-9.
3. Debasis Deb, Abhiram Kumar Verma (2016) Fundamentals and Applications of Rock
Mechanics. PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. ISBN-978-81-203-5182-0.
Online course Material
1. V. B. Maji. Rock Mechanics – Web course. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106055/
44
Title Stability of slopes Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives:
1. To understand the influence of geology, rockmass properties, and hydrology on the
stability of slopes.
2. To present basic types of analytical and numerical methods of slope stability analysis.
3. To introduce methods and instruments of slope monitoring and stabilization.
4. To enable planning and design of preventive measures, and redesign of failed slopes.
Learning outcomes:
1. Knowledge of data collection from field-work, aerial photography, geophysics, and
geological map.
2. Knowledge of kinematic analysis of slopes using geological data and stereographic
projection.
3. Knowledge of kinetic analysis of slopes and influence of critical geometrical and
hydrological parameters.
4. Knowledge of available methods of slope stabilization by reinforcements and rock
removal.
5. Knowledge of instrumental facilities to monitor slope movement and subsequent
classification.
Course content:
Structural geology for slope analysis: Geological structures; Orientation of
discontinuities; Introduction to geological maps; Identification of modes of slope instability
[Lecture: 4]
Site investigation and geological data collection: Site reconnaissance; Geological
mapping; Spacing, persistence, and roughness of discontinuities; Probabilistic analysis of
structural geology; Drilling and logging. [Lecture: 4]
Rock strength properties: Scale effect and rock strength; Shear strength of discontinuities;
Laboratory testing of discontinuities; Hoek-Brown strength criterion for fractured rock mass;
Rock durability and compressive strength [Lecture: 4]
Plane failure: Conditions of plane failure; Influence of groundwater on stability; Critical
tension crack: identification and influence; Influence of critical slide plane inclination; Analysis
of failure on a rough plane; Reinforcement of a slope; Seismic analysis of slopes [Lecture: 5]
Wedge failure: Conditions of wedge failure; Wedge analysis including cohesion, friction, and
water pressure; Wedge stability chart for friction; Compression wedge analysis [Lecture: 5]
Circular failure: Conditions of circular failure; Methods of analysis; Derivation and use of
circular failure charts; Location of critical slide surface and tension crack; Bishop’s and Janbu’s
method of failure analysis. [Lecture: 6]
Toppling failure: Types of toppling failure; Kinematic analysis of block toppling failure; Limit
equilibrium analysis of toppling [Lecture: 5]
Stabilization of slopes: Stablization programs: Rock slope Inventory, Hazard rating
analysis; Stabilization by rock reinforcements; Stabilization by rock removal; Measures
against rock fall [Lecture: 5]
Movement monitoring: Types of slope movement: Initial response, Regressive and
progressive movements, Long-term creep; Surface monitoring methods; Data interpretation
[Lecture: 4]
Suggested Textbooks:
1. Duncan C Wyllie, Christopher W. Mah (2005) Rock Slope Engineering, 4th Ed, Spon
Press (Taylor & Francis Group), ISBN 0–415–28001–X (pbk).
2. Robin Chowdhury, Phil Flentje, Gautam Bhattacharya (2010) Geotechnical Slope
Analysis. CRC Press (Taylor & Francis Group), ISBN: 978-0-415-46974-6 (Hbk).
45
Title Wind and Earthquake Engineering Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech, M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D., Ph.D. Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To acquaint the students with the fundamental knowledge of wind and earthquake
engineering to pursue higher level courses/research on the wind and earthquake
engineering
2. To provide the requisite information on the above two subjects to the students to work
in design offices.
3. To impart the back ground materials for pursuing some courses offered in the fields of
specialization (cores).
Learning Outcomes
1. Enable the students to apply the knowledge gained in solving practical problems.
2. Enable the students to analyze the collected wind and earthquake data for providing
systematic inputs to be used in practice.
3. To make the students capable of using the knowledge gained for wind and earthquake
hazard mapping.
Contents
Atmospheric wind circulation, its mechanism, types of wind, wind measurements, wind
characteristic, different ways to express wind energy, inputs required for the analysis of
structures, aero dynamic and aero-elastic effects, aero elastic instabilities-flutter, galloping,
torsional divergence, dynamics in the wind codes [lectures 20].
Inside of the earth and tectonic plate movement, major tectonic plates, fault lines, tectonic
theory of the occurrence of the earthquake, earthquake hazards, earthquake input for
structural analysis, concept of the response spectrum, deterministic seismic analysis of
structures, salient features of earthquake code [lectures 20].
Text Books
1. Ghosh S K and Fanella D A, Seismic and Wind Design of Concrete Buildings,
International Code Council-New York (2004).
2. Taranath B S, Wind and Earthquake Resistant Buildings: Structural Analysis and
Design, Marcel Dekker, New York (2004).
Others:
1. Datta T K, Seismic Analysis of Structures, John Wiley & Sons, New York (2010).
2. IS 1893-Part-I, Criteria for Earthquake Resistant Design of Structures: General
Provisions and Buildings, Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi (2016).
46
Title Process safety and Hazards Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite None
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide comprehensive knowledge of safety regulations and their practices,
chemical plant hazards and their control, risk assessment and management
principles and techniques and accident analysis.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Identify and distinguish typical sources of risk and hazard in a process plant,
undertake hazard and operability (HAZOP) study.
Contents
Safety in Industries: Concepts and definition, storage of dangerous materials, Plant
layout Safety systems, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) incidence
rate, Fatal accident rate (FAR), Measures to take during accidents, Toxicology (10
lectures)
Industrial Hygiene: Government regulations, Industrial hygiene and safety aspects
related to toxicity, noise, pressure, temperature, vibrations, radiation etc, Evaluation
Methods, Evaluating workers Exposures to dusts, noise. (8 lectures)
Selection Mechanism: Technology and process selection, Scale of disaster, Fire
triangle Ignition, Confined and unconfined explosion, Vapors cloud explosions, Boiling
liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE), Dust explosion, shock wave, Flammability
characteristics of liquids and vapors, Minimum oxygen concentration (MOC) and
Inerting. (8 lectures)
Handling Chemicals and toxicity: Control of toxic chemicals, Storage and handling
of flammable and toxic chemical, Runway reactions, Relief system risk and hazards
management, Design to prevent Fires and Explosions, Miscellaneous Design for
preventing Fires and Explosion. (8 lectures)
Hazards Identification: checklists, Surveys, Hazard and Operability Studies (HAZOP),
Safety reviews. Risk Assessment, Hazard models and risk data. Tackling disasters, plan
for emergency. Risk management routines, Emergency shutdown systems, Role of
computers in safety, Prevention of hazard human element, Technology and process
selection. (8 lectures)
Text Books
1. Daniel A. Crowl and Joseph F. Louvar, 1990, Chemical Process Safety:
Fundamentals with applications, Prentice Hall, Inc.
2. Lee, F.P., 1983, Loss prevention in the process Industries, Volume 1 and 2
Butterworth.
3. Hoboken, N. J., 2000, Guidelines for Chemical Process Quantitative Risk Analysis,
Wiley-Interscience.
Reference Books
1. R. W. King and J. Magid, Industrial Hazards and Safety Handbook, Butterworth,
1982.
2. G. L. Wells, Safety in Process Plant Design, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1980.
3. Fawcett, H.H. and W.S. Wood, Safety and Accident Prevention in Chemical
Operations, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1982.
47
Title Advanced Energy Systems Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide comprehensive knowledge about conventional and several advanced energy
production technology.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. Good knowledge about different energy production systems.
Contents
● Introduction: Latest topics on energy, Energy fuels for power generation,
conventional power generation technology. [6 lectures]
● Emerging clean energy systems: Integrated Gasification combined cycle (IGCC),
Pressurized fluidised bed combustion (PFBC, AFBC). [6 lectures]
● Heavy fuel based power generation. [3 lectures]
● Advanced combustion systems. [4 lectures]
● Understanding Natural gas cycles. [4 lectures]
● Energy conservation in power plants. [4 lectures]
● Geological CO2 sequestering. [3 lectures]
● Natural gas cycles. [4 lectures]
● Materials-based Solutions to advanced Energy systems: role of advanced material,
general devices and process approaches, key materials for advanced energy
systems, structural material. [8 lectures]
Textbook
1. Khartekenko, N., Khartekenko, V., 2010, Advanced Energy Systems, Taylor &
Francies, Second Edition.
Reference Books
1. Colin Tong, 2019, Introduction to Materials for Advanced Energy Systems, Springer.
2. I. Dincer and C. Zamfirescu, 2011, Sustainable Energy Systems and Applications,
Springer.
48
Title Microfluidic Fuel Cells Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about the fundamentals of microfluidics devices as fuel
cells.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. Detailed understanding of Microfluidic fuel cell.
Contents
Microfluidic cells: Introduction, concept, classification, and challenges, categories,
Thermodynamic and kinetic of microfluidic fuel cells, electrochemical principles and
transport. [7 lectures]
Designs: Microfabrication techniques, 2D, 3D electrodes in microfluidic fuel cells,
performance evolution. [3 lectures]
Microfluidics devises: co-laminar streaming, fuel cells with biocatalysts, gas diffusion
electrodes, microfluidics redox batteries, cell arrays and Stacks. [4 lectures]
Textbook
1. Erik Kjeang, 2014, Microfluidic Fuel Cells and Batteries, Springer.
Reference Books
Research Articles from different journals.
49
Title Air Pollution and Control Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To gain understanding of basic concept of air pollution, its sources and effects on human
health and climate.
2. To introduce concepts of aerosol dynamics used in ambient sampling, designing
measurement technologies and air quality modeling.
3. To develop understanding of the concepts and strategies for control of particulate matter
and gas-phase pollutants.
4. To provide knowledge of current state of the atmosphere and introduce fundamentals of
pollutant transport and dispersion, and modeling.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
1. Developing a broad overview of local-to-global scale pollution issues and their specific
impact on human health and environment.
2. Solving problems related to dispersion and air quality modeling
3. Understanding the source level air pollution issues and identify the right control
techniques/measures to meet the desired standard levels.
4. Computing the performance of various unit operations and processes used in the air
treatment.
Contents
Introduction to air pollution: Historical events [Meuse River Valley 1930, Donora
Pennsylvania 1948, London Smog 1952, Bhopal Gas Tragedy 1984, and related Concepts],
Scales of air pollution, Sources and classification [CAPs and HAPs] of air pollutants, Air quality
and standards, Emission Inventory, The Earth’s atmosphere: Structure and Composition, and
energy balance [Lectures 6].
Aerosol Physics: Fundamentals: Source, Size and Size distribution, Gas and Particle motion:
Brownian motion, Diffusion, Inertia, External force field, Aerosol dynamics: coagulation,
condensation, nucleation, particle measurements and Sampling techniques [Lectures 10].
Emissions Control devices: Removal of particles from gas stream: Settling chambers,
Cyclone separators, electrostatic precipitation, filtration, wet collectors, collection efficiency;
Removal of gases from effluents stream: Absorption by liquids, adsorption on solids,
Examples: SO2 and NOx removal [Lectures 8].
Meteorology: Atmospheric meteorology, Wind velocity profile and Wind rose, turbulence,
inversion layer and mixing depth and Atmospheric Stability [Lectures 6].
Dispersion of air pollutants and Air Quality modeling: Dispersion models, Gaussian
dispersion model: assumptions, dispersion parameters and effective stack height, plume rise
and plume behavior, Receptor models [Lectures 6].
Effects of Air Pollution on Climate and Human health: Tropospheric Ozone chemistry,
Photochemical Smog, Acid Rain, Visibility, Indoor Air Pollution, Dose Response and Health
effects [Lectures 6].
Text Books
1. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld
and S. N. Pandis, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013.
2. Aerosol Technology-Properties, Behavior and Measurement of Airborne Particles, W. C.
Hinds, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Second Edition, 1998.
3. Introduction to Air Pollution Science, R. F. Phalen and R. N. Phalen, Jones & Bartlett
Learning, LLC, Burlington, MA, 2013.
4. Aerosol Measurement: Principles, Techniques and Applications, edited by K. Willeke, P.
Baron, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993.
Online course Material
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105104099/
50
Title Solid Waste Management Number MEL7XX0
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To enable understanding of life cycle of waste generation to disposal or sustainable re-
use
2. To inculcate basic steps of solid waste management
3. To enable selection of best possible location specific solid waste management options
Learning outcomes
1. Conceptually design waste conversion/treatment processes
2. Able to assess the environmental and the economic impact of specific types of solid waste
generated and its reuse
3. Enabled to develop innovative and smarter solutions of solid waste management at rural
and urban environs
Contents
Solid waste type and Classification, Quantity, Types of Waste Stream and its life cycle
Waste Generation- Industrial, Municipal and Agriculture, 4R strategies and Social costs
[Lectures 4].
Collection and Transport: Collection Components, their Reliability, Scavengers, Automated
Waste Collection, Design for Larger Transfer Operations, Automated Control, Inventory and
Monitoring [Lectures 5].
Separation and Processing Techniques: Separation and Screening Equipment,
Automated Sorters, Solid Waste Processing, Recovering, E-Waste, Size Reduction,
Incineration and pyrolysis [Lectures 6].
Options for Disposal, Selection Criteria, Sanitary Landfill, Properties of Gases from
Landfills, Hazards and Air Pollution, , Leachate Control and Management [Lectures 5].
Composting: Benefits of Composting, Biological Processes Involved in Composting Chemical
Processes, Physical Processes, Thermodynamics of Compositing, Gasifying, Refuse-derived
fuel [Lectures 8].
Microbiology: Biological decomposition, Microbiology of composting, Municipal solid waste
Pathogens, enteric microbes in landfills and leachate, Pure culture, Mixed culture screening
tests [Lectures 6].
Reuse and Recycle: Reuse, Increased Product Lifetime, Material Life Cycle Studies,
Recycling, New Materials-Self Destructing/Organic, MSW Handling Rules, Public Aptitude, and
Legislation [Lectures 6].
Text Books
1. George Tchobanoglous, Hilary Theisen, Samuel Vigil, Integrated Solid Waste
Management: Engineering Principles and Management Issues, McGraw-Hill Series in
Water Resources and Environmental Engineering, ISBN-10: 0070632375, ISBN-13:
978-0070632370
2. Kanti L. Shah, Basics of Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Technology, Prentice
Hall, ISBN-10: 0139603786, ISBN-13: 978-0139603785
3. Ni-Bin Chang, Ana Pires, Sustainable Solid Waste Management: A Systems
Engineering Approach, Wiley-IEEE Press; 1 edition (March 16, 2015), ISBN-10:
1118456912, ISBN-13: 978-1118456910
References Books
1. Edward A. McBean, Frank A. Rovers, Grahame J. Farquhar, Solid Waste Landfill
Engineering and Design, Prentice Hall; ISBN-10: 0130791873, ISBN-13: 978-
0130791870
2. Christian Ludwig, Stefanie Hellweg, Municipal Solid Waste Management , Springer
2003, London, ISBN 978-3-642-62898-6.
3. Roger Tim Haug, Composting Engineering: Principles and Practice, Ann Arbor Science,
MI, ISBN-0-250-40347-1
51
Online Resources
T V Ramachandra Municipal Soild Waste Management, IISc Bangalore
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/120108005/
Solid and Hazardous Waste Management,IITM, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106056/
52
Title Remote Sensing and GIS for
Environment Management
Number MEL7XX0
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To introduce you to the basic principles of observing the Earth’s geography and concepts
of remote sensing
2. To explore its applications specific to the environment and natural resource management.
Learning Outcomes
1. Identify and obtain appropriate satellite imagery for a land surface based resource
management, service infrastructure and real world application
2. Demonstrate proficiency in the common ( open source: QGIS/ Google Earth Engine,
ERDAS Imagine, ENVI) and advanced (ARCGIS, Ecognition, QT modeler) remote sensing
software packages
3. Conduct basic to intermediate remote sensing analyses (atmospheric and geographic
corrections, spectral transformations and enhancements, classification, modelling and
change detection)
Contents
In-situ field observation; data collection; Photographic and Remote Sensing data
collection, Spectral spatial and temporal aspects, analog and digital processing introduction
and sensing economics [Lectures 4]
Electromagnetics: conduction, convection and radiation; radiation and its models,
[Lectures 6].
Aerial Photography- Camera, photography filtration-films, planning field missions
[Lectures 4]
Photogrammetry : Aerial photography, stereoscopy and its principles, image digitization,
aero-triangulation, extracting spot elevation, contours and DEMs using soft copy
photography, Ortho-imagery and Area Measurement [Lectures 6]
Multispectral Imagery: discrete detectors and scanning mirrors, Landsat: multi-spectral
scanner, thematic mapper, Enhanced Thematic Mapper plus (Landsat 7), , GOES-,AVHRR
Radiometer, Aircraft Multispectral Scanners [Lectures 8]
Thermal Infrared Remote Sensing: Thermal infrared radiation properties, laws (Stefan-
bolzmann, Wein’s, Kirchoff’s)[ Lectures 2]
Microwave Remote Sensing: RADAR, SAR remote sensing, Radar interferometry, LIDAR
Passive Microwave Remote Sensing- Radiometers. [Lectures 3]
Visual image Interpretation: The aerial/regional perspective, 3D depth perspective
[Lectures 5]
Digital Image Interpretation and Analysis: Preprocessing of Images, Image
Enhancement, Contrast and basics of spatial feature manipulation. [Lectures 5]
Note: Labs will have hands-on use of the latest Google Earth Engine (GEE), QGIS, ERDAS
IMAGINE, and ArcGIS software. It will also look into application of remote sensing imagery
in soil and water analysis, overlaying data retrieved from different subject areas of
engineering, lidar imagery and other GIS data.
List of Experiments on Surveying Based Laboratory:
1. To assess the distance between two inaccessible points in a specific area using a
compass as well as plotting the area using closed traverse (prismatic compass).
2. To solve two-point, and three-point problems using plane table survey.
3. To understand differential levelling, vertical/cross sectional plotting and contouring
using automatic levellers.
4. To survey a nearby plot bounded by any polygon using a theodolite and also to
perform trigonometric levelling to find the characteristics of a nearby building.
53
5. To plot a known area using GPS measurements and assess the accuracy of the
measurement
6. Using total station to combine electromagnetic distance measurement and electronic
theodolite to understand the ramp in the institute and their geometrical features with
high accuracy.
List of Experiments in GIS Laboratory:
1. To create a map of any area using vector data models using available ground data.
2. To perform geo-referencing when coordinate values are not given.
3. To study terrain data such as slope, aspect, and hill shade. How to use these for
representation of different social/service as well as frequency of different aspects
concerning demographic data.
4. To create a stream network or perform stream order generation or delineate
watersheds created by a water body using DEM files.
5. To perform site suitability analysis for a service building (example hospital) near to
a agricultural and inhabited land near an arid village at the edge of an oasis near
Jodhpur.
6. Basic experiments on image sharpening and image resolution using ARC GIS/ ERDAS
IMAGINE processing tool.
Text Books
1. John R. Jenkins, Remote Sensing of the Environment: An Earth Prespective
2. Lillesand, T.M., Kiefer, R.W. & Chipman, J.W. 2008. Remote Sensing and Image
Interpretation, 6th Edition, John Wiley and Sons.
Reference Books
1. Floyd F. Sabins, Remote Sensing: Principles and Applications (3rd edition), Publisher :
Waveland Press, Edition : 3rd, Print ISBN : 9781577665076, 1577665074, eText ISBN :
9781478618171.0
2. Gopi, S., Sathikumar, R., and Madhu, N., Advanced Surveying: Total Station, GIS and
Remote Sensing, Pearson, 2007, Dorling Kindersley (India).ISBN 978-81-3017-0067-9.
3. Barrett, E.C. & Curtis, L.F. 2007. Introduction to Environmental Remote Sensing,
Routledge Publisher.
54
Title Climate Change and Impact Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To gain understanding of scientific foundation and key concepts of atmospheric
science, climate data collection and impacts of GHGs.
2. To develop scientific basis of our understanding of climate system and climate change,
and associated uncertainties.
3. To provide knowledge on the impacts of climate change on natural world in the current
scenario and coming centuries.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
1. Understanding present climate system in the context of Earth’s history, reconstructing
climate evolution and relevant scientific uncertainties.
2. Developing basics of climate change science with key concepts of climate, weather,
energy balance and GHG effect.
3. Understanding energy flows within Earth-Atmosphere system.
4. Explaining the large-scale atmospheric circulations with underlying fluid mechanics
principles and role of oceans in climate variability.
5. Developing scientific understanding of climate forcing, sensitivity and feedback systems.
6. Understanding the basics of energy balance models and fundamental equations of Global
Circulation Models for simulating and estimating past and future climate systems.
7. Understanding the potential impacts of climate change and future climate change
projections.
Contents
Introduction to Climate and Climate Change: Evolution of Earth’s climate: history,
Instrumental and paleoclimatic record, Climate Change: Definition, Components of climate
system, Global energy balance, GHGs and Greenhouse effect [Lectures 5].
Radiative Energy Transfer: Radiation laws, Radiation Processes, Absorption and
Scattering by Gases and Particles, Solar Zenith Angle and Aerosol Optical Depth, Radiative
Transfer Equation [Lectures 5].
Convection and Atmospheric Circulation: Dry and moist convection, Atmospheric
convection and types, Scales of motion, Energy and Momentum Transport [Lectures 7].
Oceanic Circulation: Physical characteristics of ocean, Energy transport mechanism: Wind
driven circulation theories, and thermohaline circulation [Lectures 4].
Climate sensitivity and feedback mechanisms: Equilibrium Climate sensitivity,
Transient Climate Response, Feedback: Concept, Fast and slow feedback
mechanisms/Processes, Climate sensitivity estimates [Lectures 5].
Climate Variability: Buffering atmospheric temperature changes, Atmosphere-ocean
coupling: El Nino and Southern Oscillations [Lectures 3].
Climate modeling: One layer energy balance model, 1D EBM, Global Circulation Model,
difference between Weather forecast models and GCMs [Lectures 8].
Climate Change Impacts and future projections: Sea level rise, Ecosystem and
biodiversity, Shifting water resources, Agricultural impacts, severe weather impacts and
Human health; Impact assessment of GHGs on global temperature, rainfall and drought
patterns, atmospheric circulation. [Lectures 5].
Text Books
1. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld
and S. N. Pandis, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013.
2. Fundamentals of Atmospheric modeling, Marck Jacobson, Cambridge University Press,
Second Edition, 2005.
3. Air Pollution and Global Warming: History, Science and Solutions, Mark Jacobson,
Cambridge University Press, Second Edition, 2012.
4. Atmosphere, Ocean, and Climate Dynamics, John Marshall ad R. Alan Plumb, Elsevier
Academic Press, 2008.
Online course Material
55
https://courses.edx.org/courses/course-v1:SDGAcademyX+CCSI001+3T2019/course/
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/119106008/
56
Title Green building and Sustainable Materials Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives: Objectives of this course are:
1. To introduce elements of green building construction and use of sustainable
materials.
2. To familiarize students with different national and international green performance
ratings.
3. To teach students methods of carbon footprint reduction and increase in energy
efficiency of a building.
Learning Outcomes: A graduate of this course will have a thorough idea of:
1. National and international green building assessment system and requirements.
2. Green building design elements and use of sustainable materials.
3. Techniques to reduce the carbon footprint of a green building.
4. Management of hydrological cycle, treatment of waste, and maintainance of indoor
air quality.
5. Green building economics, business plan, and management.
Contents
Introduction to green building: Rationale for high-performance green building; green
building progress and obstacles; trends in high-performance green building; the green
building movement. (Lectures: 3)
Ecological design: design vs ecological design; contemporary ecological design; future
ecological design; thermodynamics: limits on recycling and the dissipation of materials
(Lectures: 3)
Green building assessment: US green building assessment system; international green
building assessment system; performance assessment. (Lectures: 3)
LEED building rating system: history of LEED; structure of the LEED suite of building
assessment systems; LEED credentials; the LEED process; LEED categories. (Lectures:
3)
The Green Globes building assessment system: the Green Globes process; Green Globes
verification and certification; structure of the ANSI/GBI 01-2010 standard; the Green
Globes professional and Green Globes Assessor. (Lectures: 3)
Green building design process: conventional vs green building delivery systems;
executing the green building project; the integrated design progress; role of Charrette
in the design process; green building documentation requirements. (Lectures: 3)
Sustainable site and landscape: land and landscape approaches for green buildings;
sustainable landscapes; enhancing ecosystems; stormwater management; low-impact
development; heat island mitigation; light trespass and pollution reduction; sustainable
site initiative. (Lectures: 3)
Energy and carbon footprint reduction: building energy issues; high-performance
building energy design strategy; passive design strategy; building envelope; internal
load reduction; active mechanical system; water-heating system; electrical power
systems; innovative energy optimization strategies; renewable energy systems; fuel
cells; smart buildings and energy management systems; ozone-depleting chemicals in
HVAC&R systems; reducing carbon footprint of the built environment. (Lectures: 4)
Built environment hydrological cycle: global water resource depletion; hydrological cycle
terminology; high-performance building hydrological cycle strategy; designing the high-
performance building hydrological cycle; water budget rules of thumb; sustainable
stormwater management; landscaping water efficiency. (Lectures: 4)
Closing materials loops: distinguishing between green building products and green
building materials; LCA of building materials and products; environmental product
declaration; materials and product certification systems; emerging construction
materials and products; design for deconstruction. (Lectures: 4)
Indoor environmental quality: IEQ issues; design; main components of integrated IEQ
design; emission from building materials; economic benefits of good indoor
environmental quality. (Lectures: 3)
57
Construction operations and commissioning: site protection planning; indoor air quality
during construction; construction materials management; construction and demolition
waste management. (Lectures: 3)
Green building economics: the business case for high-performance green building; the
economics of green building; quantifying green building benefits. (Lectures: 3)
Text Books
1. Charles J. Kibert (2013). Sustainable Construction. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-
118-33013-5
2. J. Newman and Ban Sang Choo (2003) Advanced Concrete Technology-Constituent
Materials (1st Ed), Elsevier. ISBN 9780080489988.
3. S. Kubba (2010) LEED Practices, Certification, and Accreditation Hand book (1st Ed)
Elsevier. ISBN 9780080958590.
Additional materials:
1. Ministry of Power, Energy Conservation Building Code 2018, Revised Version, Bureau
of Energy Efficiency, 2018,
2. Indian Building Congress, Practical Handbook on Energy Conservation in Buildings, 1
st ed. Nabhi Publication, 2008.
3. TERI-Griha’s Green Design practices (www.teriin.org/bcsd/griha/griha.htm)
4. Sartori, I., and Hestnes, A. G. “Energy use in the life cycle of conventional and low-
energy buildings: A review article”, Energy and Buildings., 20, 249-257.2007
5. Green Building Basics, California Integrated Waste Management Board
(www.ciwmb.ca.gov/GREENBUILDING/Basics.htm#What)
6. Catarina Thormark. “A low energy building in a life cycle—its embodied energy,
energy need for operation and recycling potential”, Building and Environment., 37,
429-435.2001.
Online course Material
“NOC:Energy Efficiency, Acoustics and daylighting in Building” by Prof. B. Bhattacharjee on
NTPEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102175/
58
Title Traffic Flow Theory Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives: The course will introduce students to:
1. Fundamentals of traffic flow
2. Analysis of traffic flow
3. Traffic flow modelling approaches
Learning Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student should be able to:
1. Differentiate and analyse traffic flow parameters at micro-macro levels
2. Analyse congestion propagation in traffic flow
3. Understand the state-of-the-art traffic flow modelling
4. Perform traffic flow modelling and analysis using field data
Contents
Introduction to Traffic Flow theory [No. of lectures – 6]: Macroscopic parameters – Space
mean speed, Density, and Flow; Microscopic parameters – Time mean speed, Time
headway, Space headway, occupancy; Relation between microscopic and macroscopic
parameters; Fundamental traffic flow equation
Macroscopic models of Traffic flow [No. of lectures -10]: Empirical and theoretical
models, Continuity equations, Solution to linear and non-linear partial differential
equations, Two fluid model
Microscopic Models of Traffic flow [No. of lectures-10]: Car following models, Response
Stimulus model, Psychophysical model, stability, Advanced car following models
Propagation of disturbance [No. of lectures – 6]: Non-linear traffic waves and
acceleration of stream, Shockwave theory and applications
Analysis of traffic flow [No. of lectures-10]: Accumulation diagrams, Incidents,
Probabilistic analysis of traffic flow, Gap acceptance theory, Queuing theory and
applications.
Text Books
1. Ni, D. Traffic flow Theory. BH, Elsevier, MA, USA.
2. Adolf D. May. Traffic flow fundamentals. Copyright: Prentice Hall, Inc
3. Nicholas J Garber and Lester A Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. Copyright:
Brooks/Cole-Wadsworth Group\Thomson learning
4. Fred. L. Mannering, Walter P. Kilareski, and Scott S. Washburn. Principles of
Highway Engineering and Traffic Analysis. Copyright: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
5. C. Jotin Khisty and B. Kent Lall. Transportation Engineering. Copyright; Pearson
Education, Inc.
Additional references:
1. Kadiyali. L. R. (2016).Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Khanna
Publishers
2. Chakroborty, P., Animesh Das (2017). Principles of Transportation Engineering.
Second Edition, PHI Learning Private Limited
3. Saxena S. C. (2014). Textbook of Highway and Traffic engineering. CBS
4. Samuel Morgan (2016) Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Williford Pr.
5. Jaume Barceló. (2010) Fundamentals of Traffic Simulation. Springer.
6. Roess, R.P., Prassas E. S., McShane W. R. (2010) Traffic Engineering. Pearson
59
Title Traffic System and Management Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives: The course will introduce students to:
1. Traffic system characteristics
2. Traffic control system
3. Traffic studies and basic analysis
4. Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)
Learning Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student should be able to:
1. Understand in-depth the data collection methods and analysis of various traffic flow
parameters
2. Design traffic control systems
3. Have adequate exposure to various traffic management measures
4. Understand the fundamentals and applications of ITS
Contents
Traffic Systems Characteristics [No. of lectures- 6]: User, Vehicle and Traffic
characteristics
Traffic Studies and Basic Analysis [No. of lectures-10]: Speed, journey time, and delay
studies, Volume and occupancy studies, Origin-destination Studies, Parking studies,
Accident Studies. Capacity and Level of Service (LOS) analysis
Traffic Control System [No. of lectures -12]: Road markings – Principles of road
markings, carriageway markings and object markings; Traffic signs – Importance of
traffic signs, Types of traffic signs; Intersection control, Signal design- Illustration of
signals, fixed time signals, signal design using IRC method and HCM method
Traffic Management [No.of lectures-8]: Strategies and techniques, Traffic calming,
congestion studies and road pricing.
Intelligent Transportation system [No. of lectures – 6]: User services and architecture,
standards and evaluation, Public Transport and bus priority, Artificial intelligence in
advanced traffic and ITS
Text Books
1. Nicholas J Garber and Lester A Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. Copyright:
Brooks/Cole-Wadsworth Group\Thomson learning
2. Fred. L. Mannering, Walter P. Kilareski, and Scott S. Washburn. Principles of Highway
Engineering and Traffic Analysis. Copyright: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
3. C. Jotin Khisty and B. Kent Lall. Transportation Engineering. Copyright; Pearson
Education, Inc.
4. https://coeut.iitm.ac.in/ITS_synthesis.pdf
5. Sussman, J. Perspectives on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). New York, NY:
Springer, 2005
Additional references:
1. Kadiyali. L. R. (2016).Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Khanna Publishers
2. Chakroborty, P., Animesh Das (2017). Principles of Transportation Engineering.
Second Edition, PHI Learning Private Limited
3. Roess, R.P., Prassas E. S., McShane W. R. (2010) Traffic Engineering. Pearson
60
Title Soil Stabilization and Ground Improvement Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives: This course will introduce:
1. Scopes of soil stabilization and ground improvement in various geotechnical
projects.
2. Different conventional and advanced method of ground improvement and their
applications.
3. Role of ground water and soil types on the stability of soil covers and grounds.
Learning Outcomes: A graduate of this course will have a thorough knowledge of:
1. Behaviour of soils under different environmental conditions and their compaction
behavior.
2. Role and planning of drainage to enhance stability of grounds.
3. Different mechanical, chemical, and cmenting stabilization techniques regularly
used in stabilization programs.
4. Use of geosynthetics and influence of their properties on ground improvement.
5. Elements of grouting and injection to increase soil stabilization.
Contents
 Formation and development of ground: Formation of rock, soil, and soil profile; Soil
distribution in India; alteration of ground after formation; reclaimed soil; ground
improvement potential (Lectures: 3)
 Compaction: compaction mechanics; field procedure; surface compaction; selection
of field compaction procedures; compaction quality control. (Lectures: 3)
 Drainage methods: seepage; filter requirements; groundwater; methods of
dewatering systems; design steps for dewatering systems; drains. (Lectures: 5)
 Precompression and vertical drains: compressibility of soils and consolidation; pre-
loading and surface fills; vertical drains; granular piles; dynamic consolidation;
consolidation by electro-osmosis. (Lectures: 5)
 Vibration methods: vibro-compression; vibro-displacement compression. (Lectures:
5)
 Grouting and injection: aspects of grouting; grouting procedure; applications.
(Lectures: 5)
 Mechanical, cementing, and chemical stabilization: requirements of soil stabilization;
mechanical stabilization; Portland cement stabilization; bituminous stabilization;
chemical stabilization; construction methods. (Lectures: 4)
 Geosynthetics: geosynthetic types; properties of geosynthetics; applications of
geosynthetics (Lectures: 5)
 Contemporary soil improvement techniques: soil reinforcement; soil nailing; thermal
methods; backfill materials for retaining walls; improving rock stability and quality.
(Lectures: 5)
 Case histories of ground improvement: traditional ground improvements adopted in
weak soils in India and abroad; codal suggestions. (Lectures: 2)
Text Books
1. Hausmann, M.R. (1990). Engineering Principles of Ground Modification, McGraw-Hill
International Editions. ISBN: 9780070272798.
2. Dr. Purushottama Raj (2005). Ground Improvement Techniques. Laxmi
Publications. ISBN: 9788170088370.
3. Bowles J.E. (1997). Foundation Analysis and Design (5th Ed). Tata McGraw-Hill
International Edition. ISBN 0-07-912247-7.
Online course Material
1. Ground Improvement Techniques by Dr. G.L. Sivakumar Babu on NTPEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/108/105108075/
61
Title Foundation Engineering Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD,
Ph.D
Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives: this course aims at :
1. Introducing basic principles and methods of foundation design and constructions.
2. Introducing different ambient conditions that influence the stability of a foundation
in short and long-term.
3. Introducing methods of stable foundations in earthquake prone areas.
Learning Outcomes: Students will have the ability to
1. Analyze the properties of soil and rock to design appropriate foundations.
2. Analytical knowledge of short-term and long-term consolidation behavior of
foundations.
3. Device methods to protect new and historical foundations against decay and
collapse.
4. Design earthquake resistant foundation in different soils and rocks.
5. Apply international and national codes to study soil behavior and design
foundations.
Contents
 Shallow and deep foundation: selection of foundation type; shallow foundations; deep
foundation. (Lectures: 3)
 Bearing capacity of foundations: Bearing capacity of shallow foundations; bearing
capacity of deep foundations; lateral load capacity of deep foundations (Lectures: 3)
 Settlement of foundations: Collapsible soil; settlement of cohecionless soil; other
common causes of settlement; foundation on rock; allowable settlement. (Lectures:
3)
 Consolidation: laboratory consolidation test; immediate settlement; primary
consolidation; rate of primary consolidation; secondary compression; consolidation
of soil beneath shallow foundation; consolidation of soil beneath deep foundation;
settlement of unsaturated cohesive soil. (Lectures: 3)
 Foundation of expansive soil: expansion potential; basic expansive soil principles;
prediction of foundation movement; foundation design for expansive soil; flatwork;
expansive rock. (Lectures: 3)
 Retaining walls: simple retaining wall without wall friction; simple retaining wall with
friction; design and construction of retaining walls; restrained retaining walls;
mechanically stabilized earth retaining walls; sheet pile walls; temporary retaining
walls; moisture migration through basement walls. (Lectures: 4)
 Foundation deterioration and cracking: timber decay; sulfate attack on concrete;
frost; historic structures; shrinkage cracking; moisture migration through slab-on-
grade foundations. (Lectures: 4)
 Geotechnical earthquake engineering: seismological concepts; ground motion
parameters; dynamic soil behavior; ground response analysis; liquefaction; slope
stability. (Lectures: 4)
 Seismic strengthening/retrofitting methods for foundations: earthquake structural
damage; foundation settlement; retaining walls; foundation alternatives to mitigate
earthquake effects. (Lectures: 4)
 Grading and other soil improvement methods: grading; compaction; soil
improvement methods. (Lectures: 4)
 Foundation excavation, underpinning, and field load tests: foundation excavation and
construction; field load tests; foundation underpinning; observational method.
(Lectures: 4)
62
 Subsurface investigation and instrumentations: traditional in-situ investigations;
advanced geophysical tests; field instrumentations. (Lectures: 3)
 International building codes for foundations: general regulations for footing and
foundations; foundation adjacent to slopes; retaining walls. (Lectures: 3)
Text Books
1. Bowles JE (1997) Foundation Analysis and Design (5th Ed). Tata-McGraw Hill
International Edition. ISBN 0-07-912247-7.
2. Robert W. day (2010). Foundation Engineering Handbook (2nd Ed). McGraw-Hill
Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-174010-4.
3. Budhu. M (2012). Soil Mechanics and Foundations (3 rd Ed). John Wiley and Sons.
ISBN: 978-0-470-55684-9.
4. Robert W. day (2010). Foundation Engineering Handbook (2 nd Ed). McGraw-Hill
Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-174010-4.Manjriker
Additional references:
Foundation Engineering (2018) by Prof. Kousik Deb on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105176/
63
Title Reliability Engineering Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD,
Ph.D
Type ME
Prerequisite Nil
Objectives: This course aims at:
1. Introducing basic principles of statistics, uncertainty and reliability analysis.
2. Enhancing engineering knowledge and specialist techniques to prevent/reduce the
likelihood of failures of structures.
3. Introduction of different methods of reliability analysis in Civil Engineering.
Learning Outcomes: Students will have the ability to:
1. Analyze the statistical moments of input random variables and the output
performance function.
2. Determine the probability of failure, reliability index and safety factors of limit state
functions.
3. Analytical knowledge of different levels of reliability used for structures.
4. Perform reliability based design on different limit states.
5. Apply finite element based reliability analysis to structural components and
systems.
Contents:
 Introduction to Reliability Engineering: Concepts of structural safety, limit state and
reliability; types of uncertainty; reliability analysis and its importance. (Lectures: 2)
 Basics of statistics and probability: Basic statistics; theory of probability; probability
distribution function; hypothesis testing. (Lectures: 3)
 Resistance parameters and distributions: Statistics of material properties and
strength; dimensional variations; allowable stresses. (Lectures: 3)
 Simulation based study of structural safety: Monte Carlo method; Latin hypercube
sampling; advanced sampling techniques. (Lectures: 3)
 Level 2 reliability methods: Basic variables and failure surface; first order second
moment method. (Lectures: 3)
 Gradient based methods: first and second order methods; independent, correlated,
normal and non-normal random variables based limit states. (Lectures: 5)
 Response surface based methods: Conventional response surface method; advanced
response surface methods with examples. (Lectures: 4)
 Reliability based design: Stochastic models of loads; determination of partial safety
factors; code calibration; safety checking format. (Lectures: 4)
 Reliability of structural systems: System reliability – series and parallel; bounds on
system reliability; modelling of structural systems. (Lectures: 3)
 Advanced reliability methods: Importance sampling method; subset simulation
method; stochastic response surface method. (Lectures: 3)
 Brief on advanced topics: Fatigue reliability estimation; S-N curve approach; time-
dependent reliability. (Lectures: 3)
 Design optimization: Introduction to the concept of design optimization; examples
on solving reliability based design optimization problems. (Lectures: 3)
 Application of reliability analysis and design: applications to steel, concrete, offshore
structures etc. to determine probability of failure and safe design. (Lectures: 3)
Text Books:
1. P. Thoft-Christensen and M.J. Baker (1982) Structural Reliability: Theory and its
Applications, Springer-Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-68699-3.
64
2. A.H.S. Ang and W. H. Tang (1984) Probability Concepts in Engineering Planning and
Design Vol. II Decision, Risk and Reliability, John Wiley and Sons, New York. ISBN
978-0-471-03201-4
3. P. Thoft-Christensen and Y. Murotsu (1986) Applications of Structural Systems
Reliability Theory, Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-82766-2.
4. O. Ditlevsen and H.O. Madsen (1996) Structural Reliability Methods, John Wiley &
Sons Ltd, Chichester. ISBN 978-0-471-96086-7.
5. S.-K. Choi, R.V. Grandhi and R.A. Canfield (2007) Reliability-based Structural Design,
Springer-Verlag, London. ISBN 978-1-84628-444-1.
6. R. Ranganathan (2011) Structural Reliability Analysis and Design (3rd Ed), Jaico
Publishing House, Mumbai. ISBN 81-7224-851-2.
7. R.E. Melchers and A.T. Beck (2018) Structural Reliability Analysis and Prediction (3rd
Ed), John Wiley and Sons Ltd, Hoboken, NJ. ISBN 978-1-119-26599-3.
Additional References:
1. Reliability Engineering (2009) by Prof. G.L. Sivakumar Babu on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/108/105108128/
2. Structural Reliability (2014) by Dr. Arunasis Chakraborty on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/103/105103140/
3. Risk and Reliability of Offshore Structures (2016) by Prof. Srinivasan Chandrasekaran
on NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/114/106/114106041/
65
Title Structural Dynamics Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite Nil
Objectives: This course aims at:
1. Introducing the behaviour of structures (especially framed building) to various
dynamic loads, viz. earthquake, machine vibration etc.
2. Fundamental understanding to analyze structures subjected to dynamic excitation
and computing quantities like displacements, forces, stresses etc.
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize
physical insight.
4. Problem solving ability for dynamic response in Civil Engineering design.
Learning Outcomes: Students will have the ability to:
1. Establish dynamic equilibrium and equation of motion for structural systems.
2. Analyze the dynamic response and stress generation in single and multi degree of
freedom systems for different types of loading.
3. Implement the basis for the classical energy formulations in dynamical systems.
4. Model structural damping and solve problems in frequency as well as time domain.
5. Solve the eigenvalue problems and gain knowledge on its useful properties.
6. Device methods to protect new and existing structures against seismic collapse.
7. Apply the structural dynamics theory to real-world problems like seismic analysis
and design of structures.
Contents:
 Basics of structural dynamics: Introduction to dynamic loading and response; types
of analysis - static and dynamic loads; degrees of freedom; lumped mass; types of
mass-spring-damper system; formulation of equation of motion for structural
dynamics using direct equilibration, principle of virtual displacement and Hamilton’s
principle. (Lectures: 4)
 Free vibration of single degree of freedom (SDOF) system: Undamped free vibration
and its solution; natural period and frequency; energy in free vibration; damped free
vibration; types of damping; concept of logarithmic decrement. (Lectures: 4)
 Forced vibration of SDOF system: Undamped forced vibration and its solution;
amplitude and phase angle; dynamic amplification factor; damped forced vibration.
(Lectures: 3)
 Force transmission and vibration measurement: Resonant frequency and half power
band width; force transmission and isolation; design of vibration measuring
instruments. (Lectures: 3)
 Response to harmonic and periodic motions: Response of SDOF systems to harmonic
loads and periodic excitations; Fourier series representation. (Lectures: 4)
 Response to arbitrary motions: Response of SDOF systems to unit impulse excitation,
arbitrary force (solution using Duhamel's integral), step and ramp forces, rectangular
pulse and half sinusoidal waves. (Lectures: 4)
 Numerical methods of solution: Determining the dynamics response using methods
such as time stepping methods, central difference method and Newmark's method.
(Lectures: 4)
 Response spectrum: Concept of response spectrum; uses of response spectrum;
complex frequency transfer function; development of tripartite plot; base shear and
bending moment; response of structure in frequency domain. (Lectures: 4)
 Multi-degree of freedom (MDOF) systems: Equation of motion for MDOF system;
solution of equation, matrix properties; natural frequencies and mode shapes; static
condensation; modal orthogonality; mode superposition analysis of MDOF system;
approximate method for finding natural frequency. (Lectures: 5)
66
 Earthquake response of MDOF systems: Time history analysis; response spectrum
analysis. (Lectures: 2)
 Dynamic response of continuous systems: Vibration of continuous systems; axial
vibration of prismatic bar; flexural vibration of beams; shear and bending behaviour;
generalized SDOF. (Lectures: 3)
 Applications: Introduction to finite element method; formation of element stiffness,
mass and force matrices; examples for seismic analysis and response. (Lectures: 2)
Text Books:
1. J.M. Biggs (1964) Introduction to Structural Dynamics, McGraw Hill, NY. ISBN 07-
005255-7.
2. R.W. Clough and J. Penzien (1993) Dynamics of Structures (2nd Ed), McGraw Hill Inc
Editor. ISBN 0-07-011392-0.
3. A.K. Chopra (2017) Dynamics of Structures Theory and Application to Earthquake
Engineering (5th Ed), Prentice Hall, NJ. ISBN 978-0-134-55512-6.
4. A.K. Jain (2017) Dynamics of Structures with MATLAB® Applications, Pearson
Education, Chennai, India. ISBN 978-9-332-55855-7
5. M. Paz and Y.H. Kim (2019) Structural Dynamics Theory and Computation (6th Ed),
Springer Nature, Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-319-94742-6.
Additional References:
1. Structural Dynamics (2012) by Dr. Pradipta Banerji on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101006/
2. Structural Dynamics (2016) by Prof. Ramancharala Pradeep Kumar on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106151/
3. Structural Dynamics for Civil Engineers - SDOF Systems (2019) by Prof. Riya
Catherine George on NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/104/105104189/
67
Title Advanced Mechanics of Solids Number MEL7XX0
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. Enable students to learn advanced concepts of stress analysis
2. Apply concepts to analysis of mechanical systems such as rotating disks, thick
cylinders etc.
Learning Outcomes
1. Develop Ability to solve advanced stress analysis problems using analytical and
numerical methods
2. Ability to formulate and solve 3D problems in stress analysis
Contents
1. Introduction to Cartesian tensors, Stress: Normal and shear stress, Equilibrium
equations (force and moment), Symmetry of shear tensor, Equilibrium at boundary
(Cauchy Equation). 2-D problems Plane stress, Stress transformation, Principal
stresses, maximum shear stress, Mohr’s circle (7 Lectures)
2. Displacements and strains, Green’s strain, Compatibility condition, Plane strain
Problems, Strain transformation, Strain gage and rosette (5 Lectures)
3. Structural Approximations: Physical and mathematical. Structural elements-bars,
beams, plates, membrane, shear panel, shells (1 Lectures)
4. Mechanical behavior of Engineering Materials, Effect of Temperature, Anisotropic,
Isotropic, Orthotropic materials, Failure Criteria (Distortion strain energy, Octahedral
shear stress) Maximum normal stress, Maximum Shear stress (Tresca), Maximum
distortion energy (von-Mises and Hencky) (4 Lectures)
5. Theory of Elasticity, Plane Stress Problem with Stress formulation in 2-D, Plane Strain
Problem with Stress Formulation in 2-D, Airy’s stress function, stress, strain and
equilibrium in polar coordinates, Displacement formulation with plane stress, St.
Venant’s Principle (4 Lectures)
6. Bending and extension of beams, stress-resultants, Equilibrium equations in terms
of deformation with transverse and axial load (3 Lectures)
7. Torsion of slender bodies (beams), Prandtl stress function formulation, Membrane
analogy, Closed form beam torsion analytical solution, Warping function formulation,
Thin Walled open sections, Torsion constants for rolled and extruded beams, Thin
walled closed sections, Shear flow (8 Lectures)
8. Beam shearing stresses due to shear forces, Shear Centre (3 Lectures)
9. Euler Buckling (3 Lectures)
10. Principle of virtual-work (4 Lectures)
Text Books
1. Srinath, L.S. (2009), Advanced Solid Mechanics, Tata McGraw-Hill
2. Timoshenko, S.P., and Goodier, J.N. (1980), Theory of Elasticity, Tata McGraw- Hill
3. Sadd, M. H. (2006), Elasticity: Theory, Applications and Numerics, Academic Press
Online course Material
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106049/
68
Title Substation Infrastructure Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide exposure to layout of various components of substation and design its
infrastructure.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Develop the layout of a substation and design the substation infrastructure
Contents
Substation Layout: Substation design considerations, layouts - various bus
configurations and space requirements (5 lectures)
Auxiliary Power: Battery and charger configurations, battery capacity, battery sizing
calculations, AC power supplies, auxiliary transformation connections, earthing
transformer (5 lectures)
Current and Voltage Transformers: Types, design and construction constructions, (4
lectures)
Insulators: Insulator materials, types, design consideration, testing (4 lectures)
Earthing and Bonding: Touch and step voltage, earthing materials, earth resistance,
earth potential rise, protective multiple earthing (5 lectures)
Switchgear: Introduction, switches, disconnectors, contactors, introduction to operating
mechanism and arc quenching (5 lectures)
Textbook
1. Bayliss,C., Hardy,B., (2012), Transmission and Distribution Electrical Engineering, 4th
Edition, Newnes publications
2. Rao,S., (1992), Electrical Substation Engineering and Practice Engineering & Practice
EHV-AC, HVDC AND SF6-GIS, 3rd Edition, Khanna publications
69
Title Gas Insulated Substation Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-Ph.D, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide exposure to of gas insulated substations (GIS), its design, testing, and
diagnostics methods
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Design and test a gas insulated substation
Contents
Introduction: Features, economics, arrangement, and components of gas insulated
substations, comparison with air insulated substations (4 lectures)
Introduction to SF6: physical, chemical, and electrical properties, handling,
specifications for GIS applications (3 lectures)
Design of GIS: Ratings of components, estimation of electric stress, design aspects of
GIS components, insulation design, insulation coordination, grounding systems (6
lectures)
Testing: GIS testing, on-site tests, condition monitoring and diagnostic methods (4
lectures)
Problems and Diagnostics: Particles and their effects, SF6 gas decomposition,
characteristics of imperfections in insulation, insulation diagnostics methods, partial
discharge in GIS and its detection (8 lectures)
Fast transient phenomena: Origin, characteristics, and effects of very fast transient
overvoltages (3 lectures)
Textbook
1. Naidu,M.S., (2008), Gas Insulated Substations, I.K. International Publishing House
Pvt Ltd
2. Koch,H., (2014), GIS Gas Insulated Substations, IEEE Press and John Wiley & Sons
Ltd
70
Title Machine Learning-1 Number CS 7XX0
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite None
Objectives: The Instructor will:
1. Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine
Learning in today’s world.
2. Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently
work on problems relating to Machine Learning.
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications
Contents
Fractal 1
 Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic
regression (2 lectures)
 Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients,
Stochastic
 Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)
 Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality,
Kernel trick, Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)
 Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)
 Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)
 Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural
networks, SGD and Backpropagation (3 lectures)
Fractal 2
 Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral
clustering (2 lectures)
 Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections,
Compressed sensing (2 lectures)
 Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant
Analysis,
 Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (4
lectures)
 Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations,
Feature learning (3 lectures)
 Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-
validation,
 Training-Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (3 lectures)
Fractal 3
 Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning,
 Bias-complexity tradeoff, No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk
minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)
 Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)
Textbook
1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press.
Reference books:
71
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill.
Self-Learning Materials
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229
72
Title Artificial Intelligence – 1 Number CS 7XX0
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives: The Instructor will:
1. Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI, with some of
them being covered in depth
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used
Contents
 Introduction (1 lecture)
 Propositional logic (8 lectures)
 Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A*
search, heuristic functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm,
Alpha-beta pruning) (10 lectures)
 Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures)
 Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures)
 Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures)
 Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures)
 Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-
Shafer theory,
 Fuzzy logic (6 lectures)
Textbook
1. Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd
Edition, Prentice Hall.
Reference books:
1. Research literature
Self-Learning Materials
1. Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,
http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F
2. NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/
73
Title Wave Energy Conversion Number
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-0 [1]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type ME
Prerequisite
Objectives: this course aims at:
1. Introducing elements of wave energy, wave energy converters (WECs), conversion
systems, its economics, and future potential.
Learning Outcomes: Students will have the ability to
1. Understand the geographical distribution of wave energy potential.
2. Classify wave energy conversion process, and choose different near-shore to offshore
conversion devices.
3. Understand principles of different components of power conversion systems.
4. Develop cost & performance analysis of shoreline, near-shore, and offshore systems.
5. Understand positive and negative impacts of such systems and methods to minimize
them.
Contents
 Ocean waves Wave and Wave Energy: Origin and description of waves; Wave
climatology and resource distribution; Wave energy resource assessment and
development; Wave power activities across the globe.
 Wave energy conversion system and power transfer systems: Conversion
technology; conversion development; Mechanical interface; energy storage; Electric
power conversion; Transmission to grid
 Economics: Cost of wave energy; capital, operating, and generating cost; economics
of wave-powered desalination.
 Environmental and socioeconomics implications: Benefits; Impacts; Impact
assessment; Other considerations.
Text Book
1. Bhattacharyya R, McCormick ME (2003). Wave Energy Conversion. Volume 6. Elsevier
Ocean Engineering Book Series. Elsevier. ISBN: 0 08 044212 9
Reference Books
1. Arthur Pecher, Jens Peter Kofoed, (2017) Handbook of Ocean wave Energy, Springer
2. T.W. Thorpe, (1999) A Brief Review of Wave Energy, UK Department of Trade and
Industry, ETSU-R120, 25 May 99
Online Material:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/content/storage2/courses/108108078/pdf/chap8/teach_slides08.pdf