M. Tech. and M. Tech. – Ph. D. Dual
Degree
in
Infrastructure Engineering with
Specialization in Environmental
Engineering
Introduction
There is no denying in the fact that we are undergoing unprecedented to rapid demographic
and technological change. The unabated rapid growth of the world population leading to
resource scarcity and urbanization in both developed and emerging countries is posing a
serious challenge to our society. The effects of such developments are not easy to
comprehend as they change extremely fast and have systemic effect. The intertwined
impacts of environmental issues, technology choices, production and consumption
practices, industrial processes and pricing policies on human health is far more complex
than realized. To handle these global environmental challenges of 21st century and tasks of
the future, our silo behavior needs to be transformed into more systemic and integrative
way by utilizing the potential of diverse fields of classical Environmental Engineering,
Energy and Geology, Biological processes, Public health and Safety, Economics, and Data
analytics. These major thrust areas will not only assist in shifting our focus from
conventional end-of-pipe solutions to environment protection, pollution prevention and
waste minimization but also transcend towards design of safe and sustainable
infrastructure.
With this systemic vision, IIT Jodhpur is offering M. Tech and M. Tech-Ph.D. program in
Infrastructure Engineering with specialization in Environmental Engineering. The main
objective of this specialized program is to contribute towards ecological and sustainable
development of our built environment and the associated necessary and rapid
transformations leading towards a decarbonized economy. It is one of its kind of
interdisciplinary program designed to create a knowledge bridge across public health and
physical, biological and chemical facets of science and engineering.
The program provides students an opportunity to acquire new technical competences in
various environmental models and processes that form the core of relevant engineering
practices, and future academic and professional environmental leaders. Our future
engineers will extend their knowledge from core technical competencies of Environmental
Engineering to in-depth understanding of social, economic and health consequences of
pollution problems, natural disasters, exceedances, climate change and other related threats.
Objective of the program
The unique program of M. Tech and M. Tech-Ph.D. in Infrastructure Engineering with
specialization in Environmental Engineering aims to produce scientifically and
technologically resourceful professionals with broad knowledge of environmental
processes and engineering techniques integrated with basic knowledge of biosafety,
toxicology and other public health issues required in identifying emerging complex
problems at the interface of environment engineering and public health, and creatively
developing effective solutions. This specially tailored program will enable students to think
proactively and preemptively while confronting public health challenges emerging out of
local and global environmental issues. The integration of major thrust areas of Civil,
Infrastructure and Environmental Engineering with Public health in this cross-disciplinary
program will enable graduates to interface between urban development and the sustainable
environment.
Expected Graduate Attributes
A successful graduate of this program should be able to:
1. Possess detailed knowledge of air and water pollution, fate and transport of pollutants,
related ecological processes, conventional as well as advanced monitoring techniques,
and small and large-scale treatment techniques.
2. Identify the causes and assess impacts of pollution and other varied dimensions of
environmental problems useful in environmental and health risk assessment while
framing environmental policy guidelines.
3. Utilize working knowledge of engineered systems, and ecological and biological
processing techniques in designing innovative Solid Waste Management solutions and
remediation techniques.
4. Develop basic understanding of Remote Sensing and GIS techniques for their
integrated use in addressing environmental problems as well as public health issues.
5. Engage themselves as a spokesperson in the political discourse and objective supporter
of society, politics and their decisions for a sustainable future.
6. Develop understanding of geomorphology in managing natural hazards.
7. Use computational and advanced data analytical techniques to augment and extend the
existing ideas, approaches or actions in the field of environment and public health.
8. Engage in ethical and responsible practices while pursuing professional growth.
9. Communicate scientific ideas or applications effectively with a large range of
audiences.
Learning Outcomes
1. Achieve proficiency in transport and fate of contaminants in water and mechanistic
aspects of advanced wastewater treatment systems to provide innovative solutions to
rural and urban water challenges.
2. Develop understanding of the emission, sources and transportation of air pollutants
and underpinning theories in designing, monitoring, control and treatment techniques.
3. Comprehend and conceptualize various ecological and biological water and soil
treatments, and choose appropriate solid and hazardous waste management strategies
as well as recycling systems by applying the basic principles of biosafety and health.
4. Develop understanding of natural hazards and fundamental physical processes driving
regional and global climate change, and basics of climate modelling and climate
projections.
5. Achieve fundamental understanding of geospatial techniques (Remote Sensing and
Geographic Information System) in the assessment, monitoring, and mitigation of
environmental systems and public health issues.
6. Ability to identify the (a) opportunities to apply conventional and standard methods;
(b) potential of advanced data analytics as well as inherent limitations and biases of
computational techniques; and (c) methods of improvement.
7. Able to alter the historic pattern of approaching environmental engineering problems
and promote safety, welfare of public and environmental health through the knowledge
gained in this hybrid program.
Program Structure:
Overall Structure (M. Tech. in Infrastructure Engineering with Major in
Environmental Engineering)
Category Program
Core
Specialization
Stream
Electives
(SSE)
M.
Tech.
Elective
(ME)
M.
Tech.
Open
(MO)
M.
Tech.
Project
(MP)
Non-
Graded
Courses
Total
Graded
Credits 3 17 17 3 16 4 60
Semester wise distribution of credits
Cat. Course Title L-T-P Credits Cat. Course Title L-T-P Credits
I Semester II Semester
PC Program Core 3-0-0 3 SSE Specialization stream -
5
2-0-
0
2
SSE Specialization stream -
1
3-0-0 3 SSE Specialization stream -
6
3-0-
2
4
SSE Specialization stream -
2
3-0-2 4 ME Program Elective – 1 3-0-
0
3
SSE Specialization stream -3 3-0-2 4 ME Program Elective – 2 3-0-
0
3
NG HSN7XX0: Technical
Communication
1-0-0 1 ME Program Elective - 3 3-0-
0
3
NG OAL7XX0: Innovation
and IP Management
1-0-
0
1
Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15 Total (Graded + Non-graded) 16
III Semester IV Semester
MP Project-1 0-0-10 5 MP Project-2 0-0-
22
11
ME Program Elective - 4 3-0-0 3 NG HSN7XX0: Professional
Ethics
1-0-
0
1
ME Program Elective - 5 3-0-0 3
ME Program Elective - 6 2-0-0 2
NG OAN7XX0: Systems
Engineering and Project
Management
1-0-0 1
MO Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3
Total (Graded+ Non-graded) 17 Total (Graded + Non-graded) 12
List of Core Courses
S.No. Course Title L-T-P Credits
1. Introduction to Sustainable Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 3
List of Specialization Stream Courses
(Student may choose any 17 credits from the list below in addition to the mandatory
program core)
S.No. Course Title L-T-P Credits
1. Air Pollution and Control 3-0-0 3
2. Advanced Wastewater Treatment 3-0-2 4
3. Solid Waste Management 3-0-0 3
4. Remote Sensing and GIS for Environment Management 3-0-2 4
5. Climate Change and Impact 3-0-0 3
6. Environmental Engineering Laboratory 1-0-4 3
7. Environmental Economics and Management 3-0-0 3
8. Environmental Hydrology 3-0-2 4
9. Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation 3-0-2 4
10. Machine Learning for Environmental Engineering. 3-0-0 3
11. Statistics for Environmental Engineering 3-0-2 4
12. Environmental Impact Assessment 3-0-0 3
13. Ecological Engineering 3-0-0 3
14. Fate of Chemicals in the Environment 3-0-0 3
15. Indoor Air Pollution 2-0-0 2
16. Environmental Microbiology 2-0-0 2
17. Biosafety and Public health 2-0-0 2
18. GIS and Public Health 3-0-0 3
19. Environmental and Health Risk Assessment 3-0-0 3
20. Geomorphology 3-0-0 3
21. Contaminant transport to sub-surface environments 3-0-0 3
Topic Clouds Mapped with Specialization Stream Courses
S.No. Courses Topic clouds
1 Air Pollution and Control Sources and classification of air pollutants; Air
Quality standards; Aerosol dynamics; Pollutant
removal; Meteorology; Dispersion modelling;
Effects of Air Pollution
2 Advanced Wastewater
Treatment
Introduction to wastewater like municipal
wastewater, industrial wastewater,
characterisation, environmental norms;
Conventional Wastewater Treatment such as
screening, clarification, aeration, sand
filtration, ACF etc; Membrane Based
Wastewater Treatment like microfiltration (MF),
ultrafiltration (UF), membrane bioreactor
(MBR); Water Recycling and Reuse, Valuables
from Wastewater, ZLD Processes
3 Solid Waste Management Solid waste type, its Classification and
management; Waste collection system and
transport; Waste separation and Processing;
4Rs; Waste disposal methods, and their pros
and cons
4 Remote Sensing and GIS
for Environment
Management
Basic principles of Surveying and GIS; Airborne
or Satellite systems; Functional Imaging
Technologies and Image Interpretation
5 Climate Change and
Impact
Climate and Climate Change; Convection
motion and Atmospheric circulations; Role of
Oceans; Radiative Heat Transfer; Climate
feedbacks; Climate variability; Climate
sensitivity; Global Circulation Model
6 Environmental
Engineering Laboratory
Organic Pollution load testing (COD, BOD, DO);
Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Fluoride testing;
Disinfection method; Microbiological tests;
Advanced Analytical Instrumentation
7 Environmental Economics
and Management
Cost of Environmental Protection, Positive and
Normative Analysis; Markets and Market
Failure, cost-benefit analysis; Economic
Valuation; Emission Fees & Marketable permits;
Transboundary Pollution; Environmental Justice
and Environmental Ethics
8 Environmental Hydrology Water food industry nexus, transport from
precipitation to ground water, modeling
hydrologic cycles; precipitation trends and
frequencies; Infiltration and soil Moisture
Management; peak run off and storm water run
off; Streams; Floods and Hydraulic Control
Structures; Detention and Retention ponds;
ground water mapping
9 Environmental
Biotechnology and
Bioremediation
Basics of Microbiology; Kinetics and Reactors;
The activated sludge process; Nitrification and
denitrification; Phosphorus removal; Drinking
water treatment; Anaerobic treatment by
methanogenesis; Detoxification of hazardous
chemicals; Bioremediation
10 Machine Learning for
Environmental
Engineering
Regression; Gradient Descent; Support Vector
Machine; Decision Trees; Neural Networks;
Model selection and validation; Nearest
Neighbour; Clustering; Dimensionality
reduction; Generative Models; Feature
Selection and Generation; Application to
Environmental data
11 Statistics for
Environmental
Engineering
Statistics and Probability; Data types; Error
estimation and propagation; Sampling design
methods; Control charts; Estimation of
parameters; Hypothesis testing; Linear
regression, multiple regression, regression
comparison; Spatial and time series analysis;
ANOVA; Ranked data, spearaman rank
correlation; Monte Carlo Methods; Toxicology
concerns, Quantal response
12 Environmental Impact
Assessment
Evolution of EIA, forecasting environmental
changes, clearance procedure; Stages of EIA,
EIA monitoring and auditing; EIA regulations,
EIA at regional, sectoral and policy level;
Environmental Management Plan (EMP); Future
strategies
13 Ecological Engineering Ecological Engineering; Ecosystem Valuation,
Bioenergy Analysis, Life cycle analysis, Natural
Treatment Systems; Water Runoff and design
for hydrologic control, Rain gardens;
Framework and theory of natural restoration;
Risk Assessment; Ecological Modelling
14 Fate of Chemicals in the
Environment
Diffusion, Dispersion, Advection, Partitioning in
multi-component systems, Basics of fugacity-
Mackay models, Diffusion/advection equation
for transport in soil, infiltration and leaching,
evaporation and capillary transport,
Hydrograph, Analytical Steady-State Surface
Water Model, Runoff, Streams, Mass Balances
and Plug flow; Wetlands, Nutrient loading
criteria, Streeter-Phelps Equation; Dry and wet
deposition at surfaces or soil, uptake by plant
roots, transpiration
15 Indoor Air Pollution Indoor environment, Standards and
Regulations, Control strategies; Sick Buildings,
Dose-Response Characteristics Human
Exposure Assessment; Ventilation, Air flow
distribution; Pollutant emission rates and
emission factors, Control/removal techniques;
Disease transmission modes, Infectious
aerosols, Risk estimation methods
16 Environmental
Microbiology
Microbial Evolution and Biodiversity, Microbial
Communities, Interactions, and Ecosystems;
Biomass, Abiotic Factors, Microorganisms in
Air, Water, and Soil; Biogeochemical cycling,
Waste management; Microorganisms in
Mineral and Energy Recovery; Fuel and
Biomass Production
17 Biosafety and Public
health
Principles of Biosafety, Regulatory bodies and
Statutory regulations, Biosafety cabinet,
Containment of infectious microorganisms,
Methods of disposal-disinfection, BSL-1,2,3,4;
Good Laboratory Practices, Laboratory Safety
Practices; Handling and Transport of biologically
hazardous substances; Safety, Health and
Environmental Protection (SHE) and
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) standards; Material Safety Data sheets,
Toxicology, LD50,LD10; Risk Assessment,
Dose-Response relationship, Risk Management
and Communication, Risk Analysis methods
18 GIS and Public Health GIS, Health application; Spatial data collection
and analysis; Database for public health;
Mapping health information; Spatial clustering
of health events; Environmental hazards; Risk
and Spread of Infectious diseases; Ecology of
Vector-Borne diseases; Health disparities
19 Environmental and Health
Risk Assessment
Legal balancing of risks, economic costs, and
benefits, Probabilistic reasoning; Risk, Cost,
and Benefit Analysis (RCBA); Exposure-
response models, Regression, Time series
analysis, Model selection; Probabilistic dose-
response models, Moolgavkar, Venzon, and
Knudson Cancer model; Monte Carlo method;
Bootstrap methods; Markov chain monte carlo;
Entropy of information, Casual models; Meta-
analysis, pooling sample data, and statistical
decision rules; Contingency tables in risk
assessment and management; Statistical
associations and causation; Risk-based
corrective action framework; US EPA Risk
assessment framework; Simple dynamic model
of infection; Toxicological modelling for risk
assessment; Decisions for risk management
20 Geomorphology Earth’ components, Geological time scale;
Weathering and Mass Wasting processes;
Streams, Classification, Channels, Fluvial
landforms; Desert Geomorphology; Glaciers:
formation, types, movement, processes;
Ocean: waves, currents and tides, sediments,
processes; Continental drifts, Plate tectonics;
Continental crust and plate tectonics,
Paleoseismology; Earthquakes, Volcanoes:
Magma and Lava flows, classification,
distribution, Explosivity Index;
Geomorphological hazard; Hazard assessment
for risk analysis and risk management;
Geomorphic hazards and sustainable
development; Geomorphology and disaster
prevention
21 Contaminant transport to
sub-surface environments
Natural and anthropogenic climatic changes,
global climatic change, global carbon box
model, global Nitrogen and Sulphur cycle,
transport of chemicals and their reaction;
Physical transport in surface waters, sediment
transport, distribution of sediment, , dissolved
oxygen, chemical distribution among phases,
and air -water exchanges; Darcy’s law,
sorption, retardation, ground water movement,
vadose zone dynamics; Salinity and Sodicity,
leaching and unsaturated zone mass transport,
drainage and irrigation management; Metal
transport, Bio-geochemical models
List of Program (M.Tech.) Elective Courses
S. No. Program Elective Course Title L-T-P Credits
1. Stability of Slopes 3-0-0 3
2. Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering 3-0-0 3
3. Reliability Engineering 3-0-0 3
4. Structural Dynamics 3-0-0 3
5. Wind and Earthquake Engineering 3-0-0 3
6. Offshore Geo-technology 3-0-0 3
7. Green Building and Sustainable Materials 3-0-0 3
8. Traffic Flow Theory 3-0-0 3
9. Traffic System and Management 3-0-0 3
10. Environmental Aspects of Power Plant 1-0-0 1
11. Soil Stabilization and Ground Improvement 3-0-0 3
12. Foundation Engineering 3-0-0 3
13. Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3
14. Theory of Vibration 3-0-0 3
15. Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion 1-0-0 1
16. Process Safety and Hazards 3-0-0 3
17. Advanced Energy Systems 3-0-0 3
18. Plugin Electric Vehicles 3-0-2 4
19. Smart Grid 3-0-2 4
20. Transmission Infrastructure 3-0-0 3
21. Substation Infrastructure 2-0-0 2
22. Gas Insulated Substations 2-0-0 2
23. Power System Protection 3-0-0 3
24. Cyber-Physical Security in Smart Grid 3-0-0 3
25. Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3
26. Energy Economics and Policy 1-0-0 1
27. Wind turbine and field design 3-0-0 3
28. Off-shore Wind Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3
29. Off-shore Tidal Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3
30. Power Plant Engineering 3-0-2 4
31. Energy Storage 3-0-0 3
32. Biomass Energy Conversion 3-0-2 4
33. Hydrogen and Methanol Economy 3-0-0 3
34. Hydropower 3-0-0 3
35. Fuel Cell Technology 3-0-0 3
36. Electrochemical Conversion and Storage 3-0-0 3
37. Selected Topics in Distributed Generations 3-0-0 3
38. Materials for Electrochemical energy Conversion and
Storage
2-0-0 2
39. Solar Energy and Application 3-0-0 3
40. Artificial Intelligence-I 3-0-0 3
Course Content of Program Core Course
Title Introduction to Sustainable
Infrastructure Engineering
Number MEL7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-Th
[C]
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech/M. Tech-PhD Type Compulsory
Prerequisite B.Tech Degree
Objectives: This course aims at
1. Presenting elements and components of sustainable infrastructure creation and
management.
2. Introducing practices of water management, greenhouse gas reduction, and green
city planning.
Learning Outcomes
The students will acquire-
1. Fundamentals and principles of sustainable engineering design.
2. Knowledge of existing frameworks to achieve long-term sustainability.
3. Methods and techniques for waste water management and greenhouse gas emission
reduction.
4. Knowledge on the engineering and architectural aspects overall green city planning.
Content:
Process of sustainable engineering design: key principle of sustainability;
Integration of architecture and engineering; design drivers for sustainable infrastructure
system; implementation [Lectures 6].
Sustainable infrastructure framework: Green building rating system; sustainable
infrastructure frameworks: pillars of sustainability, scale-density framework, transect,
built form-ecology framework [Lectures 6].
Water conservation and supply: water management plans; achieving water balance;
analyzing water resources; water supply strategies [Lectures 6].
Integrated water management: integrated storm water management; urban storm
water treatment strategies; constraints and barriers to implementation; gray water
treatment and reuse; integrating gray water into a water resources master plan; black
water management approaches [Lectures 6].
Energy and greenhouse gases: reducing demand by design; designing sustainable
power supplies; addressing climate change and reducing carbon footprint; policy
measures for increasing energy security and efficiency; design guidelines and
performance standards [Lectures 6].
Sustainable site planning, built systems, and material flows: sustainable site
planning; green streets and transportation network; working with the land; material and
waste flows [Lectures 6].
City-scale approach: Case study1 (Guangzhou: city-scale transformation in China);
Case study 2 (Tianjin: Eco-city master plan); Case-study 3 (PlaNYC: integrated storm
water approach); Case study 4 (San Francisco city greening initiative) [Lectures 6].
Reference Books
1. S. Bry Sarté (2010) Sustainable Infrastructure. John Wiles & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-0-
470-91293-5.
Course Content of Specialization Stream Course
Air Pollution and Control
Title Air Pollution and Control Number
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-Ph.D. [CIE-EE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To gain understanding of basic concept of air pollution, its sources and effects on human
health and climate.
2. To introduce concepts of aerosol dynamics used in ambient sampling, designing
measurement technologies and air quality modeling.
3. To develop understanding of the concepts and strategies for control of particulate matter
and gas-phase pollutants.
4. To provide knowledge of current state of the atmosphere and introduce fundamentals of
pollutant transport and dispersion, and modeling.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
1. Developing a broad overview of local-to-global scale pollution issues and their specific
impact on human health and environment.
2. Solving problems related to dispersion and air quality modeling
3. Understanding the source level air pollution issues and identify the right control
techniques/measures to meet the desired standard levels.
4. Computing the performance of various unit operations and processes used in the air
treatment.
Contents
Introduction to air pollution: Historical events [Meuse River Valley 1930, Donora
Pennsylvania 1948, London Smog 1952, Bhopal Gas Tragedy 1984, and related Concepts],
Scales of air pollution, Sources and classification [CAPs and HAPs] of air pollutants, Air quality
and standards, Emission Inventory, The Earth’s atmosphere: Structure and Composition, and
energy balance [Lectures 6].
Aerosol Physics: Fundamentals: Source, Size and Size distribution, Gas and Particle motion:
Brownian motion, Diffusion, Inertia, External force field, Aerosol dynamics: coagulation,
condensation, nucleation, particle measurements and Sampling techniques [Lectures 10].
Emissions Control devices: Removal of particles from gas stream: Settling chambers,
Cyclone separators, electrostatic precipitation, filtration, wet collectors, collection efficiency;
Removal of gases from effluents stream: Absorption by liquids, adsorption on solids,
Examples: SO2 and NOx removal [Lectures 8].
Meteorology: Atmospheric meteorology, Wind velocity profile and Wind rose, turbulence,
inversion layer and mixing depth and Atmospheric Stability [Lectures 6].
Dispersion of air pollutants and Air Quality modeling: Dispersion models, Gaussian
dispersion model: assumptions, dispersion parameters and effective stack height, plume rise
and plume behavior, Receptor models, Introduction to Dispersion and receptor modeling
software [Lectures 6].
Effects of Air Pollution on Climate and Human health: Tropospheric Ozone chemistry,
Photochemical Smog, Acid Rain, Visibility, Indoor Air Pollution, Dose Response and Health
effects [Lectures 4].
Text Books
1. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld
and S. N. Pandis, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013.
2. Aerosol Technology-Properties, Behavior and Measurement of Airborne Particles, W. C.
Hinds, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Second Edition, 1998.
3. Introduction to Air Pollution Science, R. F. Phalen and R. N. Phalen, Jones & Bartlett
Learning, LLC, Burlington, MA, 2013.
4. Aerosol Measurement: Principles, Techniques and Applications, edited by K. Willeke, P.
Baron, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993.
Online course Material
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105104099/
Advanced Wastewater Treatment
Title Advanced Wastewater Treatment Number
Department (i) Chemical Engineering,
(ii) Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE-EE] Type (i)
Programme
Elective for
Chemical
Engineering,
(ii)
Specialization
Stream
Elective for
Environmental
Engineering
Prerequisite
Objectives
The instructor will:
1. Impart comprehensive knowledge of industrial and municipal wastewater.
2. Discuss mechanism and methodologies for wastewater treatment.
3. Discuss case studies.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the:
1. Comprehensive knowledge of wastewater treatment.
2. Knowledge of advanced methodologies such as recycle and reuse.
Contents
Introduction: Waste water engineering: an overview, characterisation of waste water and
monitoring of industrial and municipal waste water, emerging contaminants,
environmental impacts of waste water constituents [Lectures 4].
Conventional Water and Waste Water Treatment: Existing unit operations and
processes, basic
philosophy of water treatment plants; physio-chemical treatment methods: (i) Screening,
(ii) conventional filtration (iii) coagulation, (iv) flocculation, (v) floatation (vi) Clari-
flocculation (vii) sedimentation, (viii) sand filtration, etc. [Lectures 10].
Aerobic and Anaerobic Suspended and Attached Growth Waste Water Treatment
Processes:
Aerated lagoon, activated sludge systems, trickling filter, sequential batch reactor,
fluidized bed bioreactors, Up-flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) and hybrid Up-flow
Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactors [Lectures 8].
Advanced Treatment Processes: Membrane Filtration, reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration,
nanofiltration and electrodialysis; wet air oxidation, adsorption and ion-exchange; Wet-
land and root-zone treatment of industrial and municipal wastes; Design of sludge drying
beds, thermal and biological processes for sludge and land fillings. Membrane Reactors,
New Technologies for Waste Water Disinfection [Lectures 12].
Water Recycling and Reuse: Different unit operations for water recycling depending on
end use, energy considerations, recovery of valuables from waste water, zero liquid
discharge (ZLD) [Lectures 8].
Waste Water Treatment Design Lab [28 hours]
Clarifier
Aerator
Sand filtration system
Municipal waste water system
Grey water treatment system
Sewage water treatment system
Industrial waste water systems
Pond water treatment
Text Books
1. Burton F.L., Tchobanoglous G., Stensel H.D., 2017, Waste Water Engineering
Treatment and Reuse, 4thed.,Tata McGraw-Hill.
2. Arceivala S.J. and Asolekar S.R., 2007, Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control
and Reuse, 3rd Ed., Tata McGraw Hill.
Reference Books
1. Henze M., van-Loosdrecht M.C.M., Ekama G.A. and Brdjanovic D., 2008, Biological
Wastewater Treatment: Principles, Modelling and Design, IWA publishing.
2. Sincero A.P. and Sincero G.A., 1996, Environmental Engineering – A Design
Approach, Prentice-Hall.
Online Course Material
Tiwari M K, Wastewater treatment and recycling, NPTEL course material, Department of Civil
Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105178/
Solid Waste Management
Title Solid Waste Management Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-Ph.D. [CIE-EE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To enable understanding of life cycle of waste generation to disposal or sustainable re-
use
2. To inculcate basic steps of solid waste management
3. To enable selection of best possible location specific solid waste management options
Learning outcomes
1. Conceptually design waste conversion/treatment processes
2. Able to assess the environmental and the economic impact of specific types of solid waste
generated and its reuse
3. Enabled to develop innovative and smarter solutions of solid waste management at rural
and urban environs
Contents
Solid waste type and Classification, Quantity, Types of Waste Stream and its life cycle
Waste Generation- Industrial, Municipal and Agriculture, 4R strategies and Social costs
[Lectures 4].
Collection and Transport: Collection Components, their Reliability, Scavengers, Automated
Waste Collection, Design for Larger Transfer Operations, Automated Control, Inventory and
Monitoring [Lectures 5].
Separation and Processing Techniques: Separation and Screening Equipment,
Automated Sorters, Solid Waste Processing, Recovering, Waste to Energy transformation, E-
Waste, Size Reduction, Incineration and pyrolysis [Lectures 6].
Options for Disposal, Selection Criteria, Sanitary Landfill, Properties of Gases from
Landfills, Hazards and Air Pollution, , Leachate Control and Management [Lectures 5].
Composting: Benefits of Composting, Biological Processes Involved in Composting Chemical
Processes, Physical Processes, Thermodynamics of Compositing, Gasifying, Refuse-derived
fuel, Thoughts on Circular Economy [Lectures 8].
Microbiology: Biological decomposition, Microbiology of composting, Municipal solid waste
Pathogens, enteric microbes in landfills and leachate, Pure culture, Mixed culture screening
tests [Lectures 6].
Reuse and Recycle: Reuse, Increased Product Lifetime, Material Life Cycle Studies,
Recycling, New Materials-Self Destructing/Organic, MSW Handling Rules, Public Aptitude, and
Legislation [Lectures 6].
Text Books
1. George Tchobanoglous, Hilary Theisen, Samuel Vigil, Integrated Solid Waste
Management: Engineering Principles and Management Issues, McGraw-Hill Series in
Water Resources and Environmental Engineering, ISBN-10: 0070632375, ISBN-13:
978-0070632370
2. Kanti L. Shah, Basics of Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Technology, Prentice
Hall, ISBN-10: 0139603786, ISBN-13: 978-0139603785
3. Ni-Bin Chang, Ana Pires, Sustainable Solid Waste Management: A Systems
Engineering Approach, Wiley-IEEE Press; 1 edition (March 16, 2015), ISBN-10:
1118456912, ISBN-13: 978-1118456910
References Books
1. Edward A. McBean, Frank A. Rovers, Grahame J. Farquhar, Solid Waste Landfill
Engineering and Design, Prentice Hall; ISBN-10: 0130791873, ISBN-13: 978-
0130791870
2. Christian Ludwig, Stefanie Hellweg, Municipal Solid Waste Management , Springer
2003, London, ISBN 978-3-642-62898-6.
3. Roger Tim Haug, Composting Engineering: Principles and Practice, Ann Arbor Science,
MI, ISBN-0-250-40347-1
Online Resources
T V Ramachandra Municipal Soild Waste Management, IISc Bangalore
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/120108005/
Solid and Hazardous Waste Management,IITM, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106056/
Remote Sensing and GIS for Environment Management
Title Remote Sensing and GIS for
Environment Management
Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE-EE] Type Specialization
Stream
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To introduce you to the basic principles of observing the Earth’s geography and concepts
of remote sensing
2. To explore its applications specific to the environment and natural resource management.
Learning Outcomes
1. Identify and obtain appropriate satellite imagery for a land surface based resource
management, service infrastructure and real world application
2. Demonstrate proficiency in the common ( open source: QGIS/ Google Earth Engine,
ERDAS Imagine, ENVI) and advanced (ARCGIS, Ecognition, QT modeler) remote sensing
software packages
3. Conduct basic to intermediate remote sensing analyses (atmospheric and geographic
corrections, spectral transformations and enhancements, classification, modelling and
change detection)
Contents
In-situ field observation; data collection; Photographic and Remote Sensing data
collection, Spectral spatial and temporal aspects, analog and digital processing introduction
and sensing economics [4]
Electromagnetics: conduction, convection and radiation; radiation and its models, [6].
Aerial Photography- Camera, photography filtration-films, planning field missions [4]
Photogrammetry : Aerial photography, stereoscopy and its principles, image digitization,
aero-triangulation, extracting spot elevation, contours and DEMs using soft copy
photography, Ortho-imagery and Area Measurement [6]
Multispectral Imagery: discrete detectors and scanning mirrors, Landsat: multi-spectral
scanner, thematic mapper, Enhanced Thematic Mapper plus (Landsat 7), , GOES-,AVHRR
Radiometer, Aircraft Multispectral Scanners[8]
Thermal Infrared Remote Sensing: Thermal infrared radiation properties, laws (Stefan-
bolzmann, Wein’s, Kirchoff’s)[2]
Microwave Remote Sensing: RADAR, SAR remote sensing, Radar interferometry, LIDAR
Passive Microwave Remote Sensing- Radiometers. [3]
Visual image Interpretation: The aerial/regional perspective, 3D depth perspective [5]
Digital Image Interpretation and Analysis: Preprocessing of Images, Image
Enhancement, Contrast and basics of spatial feature manipulation. [5]
Note: Labs will have hands-on use of the latest Google Earth Engine (GEE), QGIS, ERDAS
IMAGINE, and ArcGIS software. It will also look into application of remote sensing imagery
in soil and water analysis, overlaying data retrieved from different subject areas of
engineering, lidar imagery and other GIS data.
List of Experiments on Surveying Based Laboratory:
1. To assess the distance between two inaccessible points in a specific area using a
compass as well as plotting the area using closed traverse (prismatic compass).
2. To solve two-point, and three-point problems using plane table survey.
3. To understand differential levelling, vertical/cross sectional plotting and contouring
using automatic levellers.
4. To survey a nearby plot bounded by any polygon using a theodolite and also to perform
trigonometric levelling to find the characteristics of a nearby building.
5. To plot a known area using GPS measurements and assess the accuracy of the
measurement
6. Using total station to combine electromagnetic distance measurement and electronic
theodolite to understand the ramp in the institute and their geometrical features with
high accuracy.
List of Experiments in GIS Laboratory:
1. To create a map of any area using vector data models using available ground data.
2. To perform geo-referencing when coordinate values are not given.
3. To study terrain data such as slope, aspect, and hill shade. How to use these for
representation of different social/service as well as frequency of different aspects
concerning demographic data.
4. To create a stream network or perform stream order generation or delineate watersheds
created by a water body using DEM files.
5. To perform site suitability analysis for a service building (example hospital) near to a
agricultural and inhabited land near an arid village at the edge of an oasis near Jodhpur.
6. Basic experiments on image sharpening and image resolution using ARC GIS/ ERDAS
IMAGINE processing tool.
Text Books
1. John R. Jenkins, Remote Sensing of the Environment: An Earth Prespective
2. Lillesand, T.M., Kiefer, R.W. & Chipman, J.W. 2008. Remote Sensing and Image
Interpretation, 6th Edition, John Wiley and Sons.
Reference Books
1. Floyd F. Sabins, Remote Sensing: Principles and Applications (3rd edition), Publisher
: Waveland Press, Edition : 3rd, Print ISBN : 9781577665076, 1577665074, eText
ISBN : 9781478618171.0
2. Gopi, S., Sathikumar, R., and Madhu, N., Advanced Surveying: Total Station, GIS
and Remote Sensing, Pearson, 2007, Dorling Kindersley (India).ISBN 978-81-3017-
0067-9.
3. Barrett, E.C. & Curtis, L.F. 2007. Introduction to Environmental Remote Sensing,
Routledge Publisher.
Climate Change and Impact
Title Climate Change and Impact Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To gain understanding of scientific foundation and key concepts of atmospheric
science, climate data collection and impacts of GHGs.
2. To develop scientific basis of our understanding of climate system and climate change,
and associated uncertainties.
3. To provide knowledge on the impacts of climate change on natural world in the current
scenario and coming centuries.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
1. Understanding present climate system in the context of Earth’s history, reconstructing
climate evolution and relevant scientific uncertainties.
2. Developing basics of climate change science with key concepts of climate, weather,
energy balance and GHG effect.
3. Understanding energy flows within Earth-Atmosphere system.
4. Explaining the large-scale atmospheric circulations with underlying fluid mechanics
principles and role of oceans in climate variability.
5. Developing scientific understanding of climate forcing, sensitivity and feedback systems.
6. Understanding the basics of energy balance models and fundamental equations of Global
Circulation Models for simulating and estimating past and future climate systems.
7. Understanding the potential impacts of climate change and future climate change
projections.
Contents
Introduction to Climate and Climate Change: Evolution of Earth’s climate: history,
Instrumental and paleoclimatic record, Climate Change: Definition, Components of climate
system, Global energy balance, GHGs and Greenhouse effect [Lectures 5].
Radiative Energy Transfer: Radiation laws, Radiation Processes, Absorption and
Scattering by Gases and Particles, Solar Zenith Angle and Aerosol Optical Depth, Radiative
Transfer Equation [Lectures 5].
Convection and Atmospheric Circulation: Dry and moist convection, Atmospheric
convection and types, Scales of motion, Energy and Momentum Transport [Lectures 7].
Oceanic Circulation: Physical characteristics of ocean, Energy transport mechanism: Wind
driven circulation theories, and thermohaline circulation [Lectures 4].
Climate sensitivity and feedback mechanisms: Equilibrium Climate sensitivity,
Transient Climate Response, Feedback: Concept, Fast and slow feedback
mechanisms/Processes, Climate sensitivity estimates [Lectures 5].
Climate Variability: Buffering atmospheric temperature changes, Atmosphere-ocean
coupling: El Nino and Southern Oscillations [Lectures 3].
Climate modeling: One layer energy balance model, 1D EBM, Global Circulation Model,
difference between Weather forecast models and GCMs [Lectures 8].
Climate Change Impacts and future projections: Sea level rise, Ecosystem and
biodiversity, Shifting water resources, Agricultural impacts, severe weather impacts and
Human health; Impact assessment of GHGs on global temperature, rainfall and drought
patterns, atmospheric circulation. [Lectures 5].
Text Books
1. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld
and S. N. Pandis, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013.
2. Fundamentals of Atmospheric modeling, Marck Jacobson, Cambridge University Press,
Second Edition, 2005.
3. Air Pollution and Global Warming: History, Science and Solutions, Mark Jacobson,
Cambridge University Press, Second Edition, 2012.
4. Atmosphere, Ocean, and Climate Dynamics, John Marshall ad R. Alan Plumb, Elsevier
Academic Press, 2008.
Online course Material
https://courses.edx.org/courses/course-v1:SDGAcademyX+CCSI001+3T2019/course/
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/119106008/
Environmental Economics and Management
Title Environmental Economics
and Management
Number
Department (i) Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
(ii) School of Management and
Entrepreneurship
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To introduce the methods used by Economists in analyzing environment related
issues.
2. To introduce concepts of positive and normative aspects of Environmental
Economics.
3. To provide knowledge on different approaches such as Regulations and Incentive
based Programs used in controlling pollution.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
1. The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
2. Explaining the interactions between the economy and environment.
3. Understanding the concepts of market failure and their role in determining the level
of environmental quality.
4. Understanding the role of costs and benefits in environmental decision-making
processes.
5. Explaining the conceptual framework and theoretical basis of economic valuation
research
6. Recognizing and implementing the most appropriate techniques while performing
economic valuation research.
7. Employing regulatory tools to deal with pollution control.
Contents
Introduction: The environment and economics, Cost of Environmental Protection, Positive
and Normative Analysis [Lectures 4].
Principles of Environmental and Resource Economics: Markets and Market Failure,
cost-benefit analysis [Lectures 10].
Economic Valuation: Random utility modes in environmental valuation, Hedonic Price
Method, Defensive Expenditures and the Travel Cost Method, Contingent Valuation [Lectures
10].
Controlling Pollution: : Regulation, Pigouvian Fees/ Emission Fees & Marketable permits,
Property Rights and Marketable Permits, Regulation over Time and Space/ Transboundary
Pollution, Regulations under Uncertainty (Regulating Polluters with Unknown Costs)
[Lectures 12].
Life Cycle Assessment of Products, Processes and Services; Special topics and case studies
on environmental economics; Environmental Justice and Environmental Ethics;
Environmental Movement; Environmental Activism [Lectures 6].
Text Books
1. Environmental Economics, Charles. D. Kolstad, Oxford University Press, Second Edition,
2011.
2. Environmental Economics in Theory and Practice, N. Hanley, J. F. Shorgen, B. White,
Macmillan.
Environmental Hydrology
Title Environmental Hydrology Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To provide qualitative understanding of hydrologic processes.
2. To inculcate basic steps of quantifying hydrologic parameters.
3. To enable design structures for water and soil management.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
1. Enable to develop and design flood management solutions, wetlands and landscapes.
2. Ability to design hydraulic structures and processes
3. Able to predict and assess the impact of precipitation, and effectively use water for
different services such as in agriculture
Contents
Hydrological cycle, climate and society: Water food industry nexus, transport from
precipitation to ground water, modeling hydrologic cycles and basic hydrologic data
[Lectures 5].
Precipitation: Forms of precipitation, its causes, measurement of precipitation, data of
precipitation, precipitation trends and frequencies, depth-duration-frequency of
precipitation, Probability of precipitation occurrence [Lectures 7].
Infiltration and soil Moisture Management: Soil properties, soil-water balance,
infiltration and its estimation, evaporation and its estimation, evapo-transpiration (ET) and
its measurement and estimation, Crop referenced ET [Lectures 7].
Runoff: Why Runoff, Factor affecting Run off and flow models, watershed, Hydrograph and
its components, peak run off and storm water run off, flood and its estimation, catchment
character, agricultural and sub-surface drainage [Lectures 5].
Streams : Streams, Temporal and spatial streams, Stream Biota and Order, Measurement
of stage and Velocity, stream stability and sediment transport, Meander migration, Flood
plains, Stream Classification- Mountain Stream and Rosen stream methods, Channel
evolution, Losing and gaining streams Unit hydrograph, flood frequency, Gumbel and Type
III distribution studies [Lectures 8].
Floods and Hydraulic Control Structures: open channel flows, Darcy Weisbach and
Manning equations, weirs, flumes, conduits, culverts, riffles, pools and runs [Lectures 5].
Hydrology of Wetlands and in Ground Water- Detention and Retention ponds,
Agricultural impacts and Brackish systems, Filter Strips, Riparian Buffers and Ditches.
Leachate impact, sub-surface water, aquifers, wells, recharge, ground water mapping
[Lectures 5].
Experimental Outline- Modeling
1. Use the local historical precipitation data of Jodhpur and find the probability
distribution function, which can effectively predict it.
2. Use the local precipitation data as an input to derive synthetic mass curves. Further,
utilize the data to calculate runoff and land use. Use HydroCAD v.9.0.
3. Model a drainage management scenario of a porous tile of 10 cm diameter running
at the boundary between 1ft loamy soil from the atmosphere and 1ft sandy soil below
the porous tile. The ponding is 1ft height in an area of 1 acre. Use Ansys Fluent and
MicroFEM, and compare the results.
4. Create a new numerical groundwater flow model with MODFLOW-2005 / MODFLOW-
NWT, having confined aquifer at 80 m depth from soil surface. Import the data
(shapefiles, images, spreadsheets) from crop.xls; Use uniform percolation of 1ft per
acre as inflow, which can be manual input data to MODFLOW; link packages with
their parameters; run a simulation; visualize and export the results.
5. Use Hydrus 2D to simulate the water potential about the 25 cm larger and 15 cm
smaller external diameter of a porous frustum of 0.25 cm thickness leaching out
saline solution of 2000 ppm (brackish irrigation water) and train the model using a
Python program to handle different concentrations of salinity. Input training data
from the field experiments collected after soil analysis at Site C, IIT Jodhpur.
6. Using the results of water potential from Experiment 5 and estimate net infiltration
below the root zone if the crop is Okra. Use Crop ET reference values from Frangmeier
et al. 2015. Use INFIL 3.0 for the simulations.
7. Derive approximate flow effectiveness of a trapezoidal notch of 2.5 m base and 4.5
m surface with a height of 1m using OpenFlow Flow Master and compare the results
with Channeldesign and Channel Studio.
8. Use EPANET to evaluate water distribution of a community of 200 households with
an average consumption of 300 litres of water per day living at a height of 20 m from
ground level. These 200 household are supplied water from a 50 m high tank using
a given distribution plan. Refer lecture notes for the approximate length of 200 m.
Find the energy expense for distributing the water if the water tank is having 15 m
diameter and 10 m height.
Text Books
1. Environmental Hydrology, Andy D. Ward, Stanley W. Trimble, Suzette R. Burckhard,
John G. Lyon, CRC Press, Third Edition, ISBN-13: 978-1466589414, ISBN-10:
1466589418, 2016.
2. Engineering Hydrology K Subramanya, Fourth Edition, McGraw Hill Education (India),
Pvt, Ltd., New Delhi ISBN 1-25-902997-2, 978-1-25902997-4, 2013.
Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation
Title Environmental Biotechnology
and Bioremediation
Number
Department (i) Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
(ii) Bioscience and
Bioengineering
3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type (i) Specialization
Stream Elective for
Civil Engineering,
(ii) Program
Elective for
Bioscience and
Bioengineering
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. Acquaint students with the way wastes/wastewaters as well as toxic wastes are
treated.
2. Teach methods pertaining to sustainable wastewater recycling
Learning Outcomes
The Instructor will:
1. Acquaint students with the way wastes/wastewaters as well as toxic wastes are
treated.
2. Teach methods pertaining to sustainable wastewater recycling
Contents
Introduction: Basics of Microbiology, Stoichiometry and Bacterial energetics [Lectures 5].
Kinetics and Reactors: Microbial Kinetics and Biofilm kinetics, Reactor types, Mass
balances [Lectures 7].
The activated sludge process: Characteristics of activated sludge, Process configurations,
Design and operating criteria, aeration systems and sludge separation [Lectures 5].
Nitrification and denitrification: Bacterial physiology and basic process including biofilm
and hybrid [Lectures 4].
Phosphorus removal: Normal phosphorus uptake into biomass, precipitation and
enhanced biological removal [Lectures 4].
Drinking water treatment: Aerobic biofilm processes to remove biological instability,
biodegradation and denitrification [Lectures 4].
Anaerobic treatment by methanogenesis: Reactor configurations, Process chemistry
and Microbiology, Process kinetics [Lectures 4].
Detoxification of hazardous chemicals: Molecular recalcitrance, Biodegradation of
problem environmental contaminants [Lectures 4].
Bioremediation: Scope and characteristics of contaminants, Biodegradability, Treatability
studies, Engineering strategies for bioremediation, Biotechnological and genetics
engineering approaches-creations of superbugs [Lectures 4].
Laboratory Experiments: Determining empirical formula for wastewater based on
elemental analysis, Determining COD degradation rate using different electron acceptors,
Determining the microbial growth rate in wastewater under oxic/anoxic conditions,
Determining the % COD removal using batch & continuous process for simulated
wastewater, Determining the effect of initial microbial load on COD removal rate,
Determining the effect of C/N ratio on COD removal rate, determine the sludge
bulking/good settling sludge, Performing biological nitrification, Biological denitrification,
Biofilm process for water treatment, Setting up bio electrochemical system for
simultaneous C, N removal, Acclimatizing microbial consortia for treatment of hazardous
waste, Setting up an in situ bioremediation system
Text Books
1. Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and Applications, Rittmann, B.E., McCarty,
P.L., Tata McGraw Hill, 2001.
Reference Books
1. Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts, Shuler, M., Kargi, F., Second Edition Prentice
Hall, 2002.
2. General Microbiology, Stanier, R. Y., W.H. Freeman and Co, 2009.
Online course material
1. Gargi Singh, Applied Environmental Microbiology, NPTEL Course Material, Department
of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee,
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105107173/
Machine Learning for Environmental Engineering
Title Machine Learning for
Environmental Engineering
Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite Statistics for Environmental
Engineering
Anti-requisite Machine Learning-I
Objectives
1. To introduce students to various multivariate data analysis tools to deal with multi-
dimensional data.
2. Appreciate the areas of Environmental Engineering problems and issues where they can
be effectively applied.
Learning Outcomes
The students will be able to:
1. Identify appropriate multivariate data analysis techniques.
2. Develop a good understanding of the conceptual framework of how these multivariate
techniques work and applied.
Contents
(Fractal 1) CSL7XX1: Machine Learning I: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1]
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression
[Lectures 2].
Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic
Gradient Descent for risk minimization [Lectures 2].
Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel
trick, Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels [Lectures 4].
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests [Lectures 2].
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks,
SGD and Backpropagation [Lectures 3].
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation,
Training-Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization [Lecture 1].
(Fractal 2) CSL7XX2: Machine Learning I: Unsupervised Learning and Generative
Models 1-0-0[1]
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality [Lecture 1].
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral clustering
[Lectures 3].
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections,
Compressed sensing [Lectures 2].
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant
Analysis, Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning
[Lectures 5].
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature
learning [Lectures 4].
(Fractal 3) Application to Environmental Data 1-0-1 [1]: Assessment of Surface water
quality parameters; Assessment of Landfill leachate treatment; Air Quality Assessment and
source recognition; Spatial differences in river estuaries and possible sources, Miscellaneous
case studies [Lectures 14].
Text Books
1. Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Johnson, R. A. and Wichern, D. W., Pearson
Prentice Hall, Sixth Edition, 2007.
2. Multivariate Statistical Methods: A Primer, Manly, B. F. J., Chapman and Hall/CRC, Third
Edition, 2005.
3. Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Wolfgang, K. H. and Leopold, S., Springer,
Fourth Edition, 2015.
4. Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algorithms, Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-
David,S., Cambridge University Press, 2014.
5. Applied Statistics for Environmental Science with R, Alkarkhi, A. F. M. and Alqaraghuli,
W. A. A., Elsevier, ISBN 978-0-12-818622-0.
Reference Books
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill
Online course material
https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat505/
Self Learning Material
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229
Statistics for Environmental Engineering
Title Statistics for Environmental
Engineering
Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To provide a broad understanding of statistical methods and techniques of
experimental design in various environmental and industrial applications.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
1. Implementing appropriate statistical procedures for data interpretation.
2. Applying and extending the understanding of statistical principles to existing as well as
new environmental issues and techniques.
3. Designing and conducting experiments to support environmental decisions.
Contents
Statistics and Probability: Descriptive Statistics; Probability concepts and Conditional
Probability; Bayes theorem, Probability distributions, Chebyshev’s Theorem, Central limit
Theorem [Lectures 5].
Fundamentals of data analysis: Types of data, Precision measurements: accuracy,
precision, resolution, repeatability, reproducibility, consistency, Odds Ratio, systematic
and random errors, error estimation, error propagation, Outliers and its robustness
[Lectures 4].
SAMPLING DESIGN AND STATISTICAL INFERENCE
Concepts of sampling and monitoring: Simple random, systematic, ranked, stratified,
composite and cluster sampling; sampling from normal distribution, Ranked set sampling,
sampling in wild (quadrant, Recapture, transect) Completely randomized design,
randomized block design; Control charts [Lectures 3].
Estimation of parameters and intervals: mean, variance, population size,
proportion/ratio, interval estimation, maximum likelihood method [Lectures 4].
Hypothesis testing (3): Null and alternative hypothesis, Type-I and II errors, one-tail
and two-tail tests for mean and proportion (one- and two-population), inferences about
population variance, goodness of fit (Kolmogorov-smirnov test, Anderson Darling test),
Man Whitney test, Wald statistic [Lectures 7].
Regression Analysis: Simple linear regression, Assumptions, Least square estimation,
Significance testing, Residual analysis, Multiple regression, Regression comparison,
Selection of variables, Categorical variables [Lectures 6].
ADVANCED DATA TYPES AND HANDLING
Spatial analysis for Environmental Processes: Spatial point process models, Spatial
sampling and design [Lectures 3].
Time series analysis (3): time and frequency domain, auto-correlation, tests for
randomness, cross-correlation [Lectures 3].
SPECIAL TOPICS
ANOVA: Experimental design and variance analysis (completely randomized and
randomized block design, F-test, Fischer’s LSD, Cochrans Q test) [Lectures 3].
Analysis of ranked data: Introduction, Log rank test, spearman rank correlation,
Wilcoxin Signed rank test [Lectures 2].
Monte Carlo methods, Toxicology concerns, Quantal response [Lectures 2].
Computational Lab (Matlab/R or any statistically computing environment)
Introduction to R/Matlab
Probability distributions and sampling
Monte Carlo Method
Maximum likelihood basics
Regression
Interval estimation
Dose-Response relationship
Spatial and time series exploratory data analysis
ANOVA
Text Books
1. Environmental Statistcis- Methods and Applications, V. Barnett, John Wiley and Sons,
Inc., 2004.
2. Statistics for Environmental science and Management, B. F. J. Manly, Chapman and
Hall/CRC Press, Second Edition, 2008.
3. Probability, Statistics and Reliability for Engineers and Scientists, Ayyub, B. M. and
McCuen, R.H., Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2011.
References
1. Ang, A. H-S. and W. H. Tang, Probability Concepts in Engineering: Emphasis on
Applications to Civil and Environmental Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., USA, Second
Edition, 2006.
2. Benjamin, J.R. and Cornell, C.A., Probability, Statistics and Decision for Civil Engineers,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 2014.
Geomorphology
Title Geomorphology Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The instructor will:
1. Introduction to different geological processes behind observed geomorphological
features.
2. Complete understanding of depositional and erosional landforms created in different
environments.
3. Knowledge of natural hazards and application of geomorphology in managing them.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the:
1. Understanding of physics and chemistry of geological processes and their
interrelationship.
2. Knowledge of spatial and temporal evolution of different landforms.
3. Knowledge of geological hazard identification, risk assessment, and mitigation.
Contents
Introduction to Geomorphology: Introduction to geomorphology and physical geology;
Earth’ components: atmosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere; The age of the earth:
absolute dating methods; relative dating methods; Geological time scale [Lectures: 4]
Weathering and Mass Wasting: Types of weathering: physical, mechanical, chemical, and
biological; Rates of weathering; The stability of minerals; Weathering of common rocks;
Mass wasting processes; Factors responsible for mass wasting [Lectures: 4]
Fluvial Geomorphology: Development stages of a stream; Classification of streams;
Genetic classification of streams; Stream channels; Channel geomorphology; Drainage
basin and system; Basin morphology; Geological work of streams; Fluvial landforms.
[Lectures: 5]
Desert Geomorphology: Process of wind erosion; Sediment transport by wind; Erosional
landforms; Depositional landforms; Desert and desert types; Surface processes and desert
landforms; Aridity. [Lectures: 4]
Glacial Geomorphology: Formation of glaciers; Glacier movement; Glacier types; Glacial
processes; Erosional landforms; Depositional landforms. [Lectures: 4]
Coastal Geomorphology: Ocean waves, currents and tides; Oceanic sediments; Shore
processes; Coastal erosion and sediment transport; Depositional features formed by waves.
[Lectures: 5]
Tectonic Geomorphology: Continental drift and evidences; Plate tectonics; Continental
crust and plate tectonics; Causes of plate tectonics; geomorphics markers; Paleoseismology;
Deformation and landscape responses. [Lectures: 4]
Earthquakes: Location of an earthquake; Measurement and classification; The cause of
origin; Spatial and temporal distribution of earthquakes; Earthquake hazard. [Lectures: 4]
Volcanoes: Magma and lava flows; Global distribution of volcanoes; Classification of
volcanoes; Modes of eruption; Volcanic Explosivity Index; Volcanic landforms; Submarine
volcanoes. [Lectures: 4]
Applied Geomorphology: Geomorphological hazard; Hazard assessment for risk analysis
and risk management; Geomorphic hazards and sustainable development; Geomorphology
and disaster prevention. [Lectures: 4]
Text Books
1. Sreepat Jain (2014) Fundamental of Physical Geology. Springer. ISBN 978-81-322-1539-
4.
2. Richard J. Huggett (2007). Fundamentals of Geomorphology (2nd Ed). Taylor & Francis
Group. ISBN 978-0-203-94711-1 ebk.
Additional Reading
1. Douglas W. Burbank, Robert S. Anderson (2011) Tectonic Geomorphology (2nd Ed).
Wiley-Blackwell; ISBN: 978-1-444-33886-7
2. Ro Charlton (2007) Fundamentals of Fluvial Geomorphology (1st Ed). Taylor & Francis
Group. ISBN: 9780203371084
3. Eric C. F. Bird (2008) Coastal Geomorphology: An Introduction (2nd Ed). Wiley. ISBN:
978-0-470-51729-1
4. Anthony J. Parsons, A. D. Abrahams (2009) Geomorphology of Desert Environments.
Springer. ISBN 978-1-4020-5719-9
5. I Alcántara-Ayala, A. Goudie (Eds.). (2010). Geomorphological Hazards and Disaster
Prevention. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511807527
Environmental Impact Assessment
Title Environmental Impact
Assessment
Number
Department (i) Chemical Engineering
(ii) Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type (i) Programme
Elective for
Chemical
Engineering, (ii)
Specialization
Stream Elective for
Environmental
Engineering
Prerequisite
Objectives
The instructor will:
1. Impart the knowledge to the students with the methods of assessment of
environmental impacts due to developmental and industrial activities.
2. Expose the students with the EIA regulations and EMP.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the:
1. In-depth knowledge of the methods of assessment of environmental impacts due to
developmental and industrial activities.
2. In-depth knowledge of EIA regulations and EMP.
Contents
Introduction to EIA; definitions and concepts; evolution of EIA; historical development of
EIA; forecasting environmental changes; strategic environmental assessment; ISO
provisions, environmental clearance procedure [Lectures 11].
EIA documentation and processes; preliminary stages of EIA; project types and screening;
impact prediction; evaluation and mitigation; EIA monitoring and auditing. [Lectures 11].
EIA regulations; TOR for EIAs; environmental indices, EIA at regional level, sectoral level,
and policy level; sustainable development; Environmental Management Plan (EMP) [Lectures
11].
Future strategies and EIA case studies [Lectures 9].
Text Books
1. Canter, L., Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw Hill, New York, 1996.
Reference Books
1. World Bank, ‘Environmental Assessment Source Book’, Environment Dept., Washington
D.C., 1991.
2. Rau, G.J. and Wooten, C.D., Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook, McGraw Hill,
New York, 1980. Preventive environmental management.
Online course Material
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/127105018/
Ecological Engineering
Title Ecological Engineering Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To provide the basics of physical and ecologic processes.
2. To apply natural processes to guide restoration and creation of ecosystems.
3. To inculcate the fundamental design considerations of ecologically engineered systems.
Learning Outcomes
1. To be able to identify the ecological processes occurring within ecosystems.
2. To apply physical and biogeochemical processes to provide societal services.
3. Identify the benefits of ecological engineering technologies.
Contents
Ecosystem: Ecological Engineering Introduction, Definitions and Principles, Ecosystems and
their services, their importance for animal and human development, Introduction of Energy
as an accounting system [Lectures 6]
Valuation: Ecosystem Valuation, Natural Capital of precipitation, Systems Approach:
Bioenergy Analysis, Life cycle analysis, Its application of natural resource pathways such as
water, minerals, Energy analysis and application framework, Mesocosm and its application
[Lectures 7]
Natural Treatment Systems: Wetlands, Constructed Wetlands, wetland dynamics, Soil
infiltration based microbial water treatment, biological water treatment systems-
aerobic/oxidation ditches/lagoons and Living Machines [Lectures 7].
Water Management using Green and Permeable Systems: Water Runoff and design
for hydrologic control, Rain gardens, storm water management, permeable pavement and
green roofs [Lectures 6].
Natural Restoration: Conceptual framework for restoration, Theory of ecological
restoration, interface ecosystems, ecology and economics of restoration, Ecological Risk
Assessment [Lectures 8].
Ecological Modelling: Green Infrastructure Placement on Neighbourhoods, Runoff, flood
and other natural event simulation, introduction of infiltration and soil-water analysis
softwares, Case Studies in Ecological Restoration [Lectures 8].
Text Books
1. Patrick Kangas, Ecological Engineering: Principles and Practice, Lewis Publishers, CRC
Press, ISBN-13: 978-1566705998 ISBN-10: 1566705991
2. Mitsch, W.J. and Jorgensen, S.E. 2004. Ecological Engineering: and Ecosystem
Restoration, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
References
1. Glenn W. Suter II, Ecological Risk Assessment, 2016, 2nd Edition, CRC Press, ISBN-13:
978-1566706346, ISBN-10: 1566706343
2. E.P. Odum (1969) The Strategy of Ecosystem Development. Science.
3. Reid et al., (2005). Ecosystems and human well-being: Synthesis. A report of the
millennium ecosystem assessment. Pages 1- 24.
Fate of Chemicals in the Environment
Title Fate of Chemicals in the
Environment
Number
Department Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite Chemistry, Flow Mechanics,
Soils
Objectives
1. To provide qualitative understanding of of what happens to chemicals as it enters an
environment.
2. To inculcate the dynamics of chemicals as they interact with different phases during their
transport.
3. To inculcate different ways of chemical transport.
Learning Outcomes
1. To enable identification of mass transport and distinguish various chemical
transformations.
2. Able to predict mobilizing and spreading of chemicals in a media or material or a volume
of air
3. Relate the general fate of contaminants when passing through water, air and soil due to
forces such as precipitation.
Contents
Basics of Mass transport: Continuity Thought of Chemicals; Earth’s Environmental
Compartments, Lavosier species, Mass Balances, history of mass conservation, basic concept
of chemical fate [Lectures 6].
Modes of Transport: Ficks law of diffusion, films and finite fluid layers, dispersion,
advection of solutes and particles in fluids. Turbulent diffusion, film theory, penetration,
surface renewal, and boundary layer thought [Lectures 6].
Transformation and Phases: Phases, Partitioning coefficients, Aspects of Equilibrium with
Dissociating chemicals, Partitioning in multi-component systems, Basics of fugacity-Mackay
models [Lectures 6].
Soils: Soil and Its Functions, soil nutrients and contamination, Diffusion/advection equation
for transport in soil, infiltration and leaching, evaporation and capillary transport, Analytical
Solutions for Vertical Transport in Soil [Lectures 6].
Precipitation and Streams: Land use, Hydrological Data, Hydrograph, Analytical Steady-
State Surface Water Model, Runoff, Streams, Mass Balances and Plug flow [Lectures 6].
Surface Waters: Wetlands, constructed systems, Mass balances on wetland systems,
Nutrient loading criteria, Streeter-Phelps Equation, Waste Load allocation and Dissolved
gases in river waters [Lectures 6].
Atmospheric Transport: Area and Point source of pollutants in air, box model for area
source plume model for point sources, dry and wet deposition at surfaces or soil, uptake by
plant roots, transpiration, metabolism and photo-degradation [Lectures 5].
Text Books
1. Louis J. Thibodeaux, Environmental Chemodynamics: Movement of Chemicals in
Air, Water, and Soil, 2nd Edition,1996, ISBN: 978-0-471-61295-7
2. Stefan Trapp, and Michael Matthies, Chemodynamics and Environmental Modeling,
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1998, ISBN-13: 978-3-642-80431-1 e-ISBN-13:
978-3-642-80429-8
Open Source Models
ICECRM 1.1 (indoor chemical exposure classification/ranking model)
The CoZMoMAN Model- The Multimedia fate and transport models
The Global Distribution Model (Globo-POP Version 1.1)- Global fate of organic chemicals
NPTEL
Dr Bhanu Prakash Vellanki,Environmental Remediation of Contaminated sites,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/107/105107181/, IIT Roorkee
Dr Manoj Datta, Geoenvironmental Engineering, (Environmental Geotechnology); Landfills,
Slury Ponds & Contaminated Sites, IIT Delhi
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102160/#
Contaminants Transport to Sub-surface Environments
Title Contaminants Transport to
Sub-surface Environments
Number
Department Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite Chemistry, Flow Mechanics,
Soils
Objectives
1. To identify major chemical contaminants and their behaviour during precipitation and in
media.
2. To inculcate the predict techniques of pathways of contaminants in atmosphere, ground
water and other subsurface environments
3. To inculcate approaches for remediation, including their effects on contaminant fate and
transport
Learning outcomes
1. Able to predict and assess the role of water in influencing contamination
2. To engage in practical problem solving regarding subsurface contaminant issues.
3. Relate both organic and inorganic contaminants to their general fate
Contents:
Atmosphere: Climates, circulations in the atmosphere, Natural and anthropogenic
climatic changes, transport of chemicals and their reaction, Precipitation based removal of
chemical or contaminants [6]
Mixing: Physical transport in surface waters, sediment transport, distribution of sediment,
erosion due to water and its control, chemical concentration, dissolved oxygen, chemical
distribution among phases, and air -water exchanges [6]
Air based Circulations: Green house gases, global climatic change, global carbon box
model, global Nitrogen and Sulphur cycle, erosion due to wind and its control [6].
Subsurface Transport: Darcy’s law, contaminant solute transport equations, sorption,
retardation, ground water movement, vadose zone dynamics, bioavailability, redox
reactions [6]
Soils: Salinity and Sodicity, their natural and anthropogenic causes, leaching and
unsaturated zone mass transport, drainage and irrigation management, Soil based-waste
water treatment, fate of waste water pollutants [6].
Metal Transport: Trace metals, Complexation, Solubility and adsorption, Metals in lakes,
Metal migration in soils, Genesis of acid depositions, Acidity and Alkalinity, Metal
deposition [6]
Geological Aspects of Transport: Bio-geochemical models, Ecological Effects, Critical
loads and Case Studies [6].
Text Books
Jerald L. Schnoor, Environmental Modeling: Fate and Transport of Pollutants in Water, Air,
and Soil, October 1996 704, ISBN: 978-0-471-12436-8
Harold F. Hemond, Elizabeth J. Fechne, Chemical Fate and Transport in the Environment
Academic Press; 3 edition (13 June 2014),
Online Course Material
Dr Bhanu Prakash Vellanki,Environmental Remediation of Contaminated sites,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/107/105107181/, IIT Roorkee
Dr Manoj Datta, Geoenvironmental Engineering, (Environmental Geotechnology); Landfills,
Slury Ponds & Contaminated Sites, IIT Delhi https://nptel.ac
Indoor Air Pollution
Title Indoor Air Pollution Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
2-0-0 [2]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To develop understanding of the concepts of Indoor air pollution, sources and control
strategies.
2. Discuss the sources of pollutants in buildings, human exposure assessment,
infectious disease transmission and risk analysis.
3. To provide understanding of basic modeling concepts of indoor pollutant emission,
transport, and control.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
1. Integrating indoor air quality & ventilation standard requirements in healthy building
design.
2. Developing a broad overview of particle-phase, gas-phase, and biological pollutants
found in indoor environments.
3. Analyzing pollution control technologies and their effectiveness.
Contents
Introduction: Indoor environment, Properties (Residential and Non-residential),
Guidelines, Standards and Regulations, control strategies [Lecture 2].
Health Effects: sick buildings, Human Exposure Assessment, Dose-Response
Characteristics [Lecture 4].
Ventilation: Conventional and Advanced Ventilation systems, Air flow or pollution
distribution, Air filtration strategies, General Ventilation and Well-Mixed Reactor model
[Lecture 6].
Indoor air pollutants and control: Types and sources of pollutants (particles, gas-phase
compounds, biological and radioactive), concentrations, properties, emission rates and
emission factors, pollutant control/removal techniques [Lecture 6].
Gas and Particle phase pollutants: Gas Phase: Source emission modeling, Reactive
deposition, secondary organic aerosol formation; Particle Phase: Physical properties and
aerosol dynamics, lung deposition [Lecture 6].
Disease transmission, risk and control: Transmission modes, Infectious aerosol (Virus
and bacteria) properties, Risk Estimation: Well's Riley Model, Control methods [Lectures 4].
Text Books
1. Indoor air quality handbook, Spengler, J., McCarthy, J., and Samet, J., McGrow-Hill
Professional, 2001.
2. Indoor Air Quality Engineering- Environmental Health and Control of Indoor Pollutants,
Heinsohn, R. J. and Cimbala, J. M., Marcel Dekker, Inc., 2003.
3. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld
and S. N. Pandis, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013.
4. Aerosol Technology-Properties, Behavior and Measurement of Airborne Particles, W. C.
Hinds, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Second Edition, 1998.
5. Organic Indoor Air Pollutants: occurrence, measurement, evaluation, Salthammer, T.
and Uhde, E., O., Wiley-VCH, 2009.
Environmental Microbiology
Title Envrionmental Microbiology Number
Department (i) Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
(ii) Bioscience and
Bioengineering
2-0-0 [2]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type (i) Specialization
Stream Elective for
Civil Engineering,
(ii) Program
Elective for
Bioscience and
Bioengineering
Prerequisite
Objectives
The instructor will:
1. Enable students utilize the knowledge of Microbiology for environmental cycling and
enhanced agriculture productivity.
Learning Outcomes
The students will have an ability to:
1. Understand the ecological interactions of Microbes in detail and will be able to associate
the structure and function of a particular microbial community in a particular
environment.
2. Understand the soil plant interactions, how microbes make nutrients available for plant
growth and how that helps in enhanced crop productivity.
Contents
Environmental and Agricultural microbiology: Microbial Ecology, Microbial Evolution
and Biodiversity, Interactions among Microbial Populations, Interactions between
Microorganisms and Plants, Plant growth promoting bacteria, Microbial Interactions with
Animals, Microbial Communities and Ecosystems, Measurement of Microbial Numbers,
Biomass, and Activities, Effects of Abiotic Factors and Environmental Extremes on
Microorganisms, Microorganisms in Their Natural Habitats: Air, Water, and Soil
Microbiology, Biogeochemical cycling, soil, waste, water management, Microorganisms in
Mineral and Energy Recovery and Fuel and Biomass Production [Lectures 28].
Text Books
1. Microbial Ecology: Fundamentals and applications, Atlas, R.M., Bartha, R., Pearson,
2001.
2. Medical Microbiology, Jawetz, Melnick, Adelberg, 28th Edition McGraw Hill, 2018.
Reference Books
1. Biology of Microorganisms, Brock, et al., Benjamin Cummings, Boston, MA, 13th
edition, 2012.
2. Principles of Biochemistry, Lehninger, A., Nelson, D.L., Cox, M., W.H. Freeman and
Co., 2009.
Online course Material
David Schauer, and Edward DeLong. 20.106J Systems Microbiology. Fall 2006.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu.
Biosafety and Public health
Title Biosafety and Public health Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
2-0-0 [2]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The instructor will:
1. Introduce students to the modern practices, systems and policies concerning human
health protection from exposure to harmful biological agents.
Learning Outcomes
The students will have an ability to:
1. Understand national and international regulatory aspects of biosafety.
2. Conduct safe research while working with high risk biological agents and understand
the deliberate process of identifying biological hazards and design appropriate
strategies to reduce associated risk.
Contents
Biosafety: Introduction to biosafety; Basic principles of biosafety, Biosafety signs,
Introduction to various regulatory bodies, statutory regulations, Biosafety cabinet,
Containment of infectious microorganisms (bacteria, fungus, parasite, prions, viruses) and
hazardous biological materials; Methods of disposal-disinfection, sterilization by autoclaving,
irradiation and incineration; Biosafety levels- BSL-1, 2, 3, 4 and integrated methods and
equipments [Lectures 5].
Laboratory safety and storage, handling and transportation of biologically
hazardous substances: Introduction to Good Laboratory Practices (GLP), Laboratory
Safety Practices: Safety procedures, safety devices, fire safety, prevention and fighting,
Hazardous material packaging, storage and transport [Lectures 7].
Safety, Health and Environmental Protection (SHE) and Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA): Statutory regulations in India and abroad, Security
aspects, Codes and Standards, Present scenario and vision for future, OSHA; Applicable
standards for safety, OSHAS 18000 [Lectures 4].
Hazards and Evaluation Techniques: Material Safety Data Sheets, Properties,
Toxicology, LD50, LD10, pathogenicity and biohazards associated with biomaterials, levels
of biohazards [Lectures 5].
Risk Analysis: Risk Assessment, Dose-Response relationship, Exposure Assessment, Risk
Management, Risk Communication, Risk Analysis methods: Process Hazard Analysis (PHA),
Event Tree Analysis (ETA), Cause and Consequence Analysis (CCA), Failure Modes and
Effects (FMEA), Fault Tree Analysis (FTA), Hazard and Operability Studies (HAZOPs)
[Lectures 7].
Text Books
1. Biological Safety: Principles and Practices, Wooley, D. P. and Byers, K. B., Washington
D.C.:ASM Press, Fifth Edition, 2017.
Reference Books
1. Stanford University Biosafety Manual 2018, Environmental Health and Safety.
2. National Research Council 1989, Biosafety in the Laboratory: Prudent Practices for
Handling and Disposal of Infectious Materials, Washington D.C.-National Academy
Press, https://doi.org/10.17226/1197.
GIS and Public Health
Title GIS and Public health Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The instructor will:
1. Providing exposure to the application of GIS in infectious and vector-borne diseases
analysis.
2. Introducing techniques of GIS in management of health services.
Learning Outcomes
1. Ability to accurately model temporal and spatial distribution of health events.
2. Knowledge of surveillance and mapping techniques for infectious and vector-borne
diseases.
3. Ability to identify healthcare “shortage” areas and analysis of access to healthcare
services.
Contents
Geographic Information Systems: GIS functions; Trends in GIS applications; Public
health application of GIS; GIS and the internet [Lectures 3].
Spatial data: Field and object data; Tesselation and vector data models; Measuring
locations; Scale, projection, and symbols of cartographic data sources; Geographic data
quality; Role of metadata [Lectures 3].
Spatial Databases for Public Health: Foundation spatial data; population data; Health
data; Making population and health data mappable; database integration; Data sharing
[Lectures 3].
Mapping Health Information: Mapping process; representing health information; viewing
health information; GIS and map publication [Lectures 3].
Analyzing Spatial Clustering of Health Events: Mapping disease rates; spatial clustering
methods; space-time clustering; choosing a clustering method; uses of spatial clustering
methods [Lectures 4].
Analyzing Environmental Hazards: Source location analysis; modelling of fate, transport,
and environment quality; GIS and exposure modelling; GIS and dose; outcome surveillance;
environmental risk management; issues in environmental health mapping and analysis
[Lectures 5].
Analyzing the Risk and Spread of infectious Diseases: Spatial diffusion; mapping case
distributions; mapping the ecology of risk; temporal and geographical trends in disease
outbreaks; forecasting spatial diffusion of communicable diseases; planning public health
interventions; privacy and confidentiality [Lectures 5].
Exploring the Ecology of Vector-Borne Diseases: Global burden of zoomatic diseases
and the challenge of emerging infectious diseases; surveillance and mapping of vector-borne
diseases; modelling of vector-borne diseases; environmental impacts of controlling vector-
borne diseases; systematic perspective on disease [Lectures 4].
Analyzing Access to Health Services: mapping service locations; mapping health care
needs and services; assessing potential access to health services; analysing service
utilization [Lectures 4].
Locating Health Services: health care shortage areas; components and dimensions of
health service delivery systems; client population distribution; meaning of “centrality” in
health service facility location; normative models of facility location and service delivery;
incorporating normative models of facility location and service delivery into GIS; spatial
decision support systems [Lectures 4].
Health disparities: context and composition; visualizing and measuring area
characteristics; defining neighbourhood contexts; modelling neighbourhood effects on
health; location processes and link between location and well-being [Lectures 4].
Text Books
1. GIS and Public Health, Ellen K. Cromley, Sara L. McLafferty, Guilford Publications, Second
Edition, 2017, ISBN 978-1-60918-750-7.
2. GIS in Public Health Practice, Ravi Maheswaram, Massimo Craglia, CRC Press, 2004,
ISBN 0-415-30655-8.
Environmental and Health Risk Assessment
Title Environmental and Health Risk
Assessment
Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. Introduction of basics of statistics in risk assessment and decision making.
2. Introduction of uncertainty and vulnerability in risk modelling.
3. Introduction to different risk assessment framework and elements of decision making for
risk management.
Learning Outcomes
1. Understanding of dose-response and exposure-response models.
2. Knowledge of data collection, uncertainty, and modelling of risk.
3. Ability to quantify vulnerability and uncertainty.
4. Knowledge of risk models related to infectious diseases and toxicological issues.
Contents
Decision making under uncertainty: Legal balancing of risks, economic costs, and
benefits; Criteria for choices in risk management; Paradigm for decision-making;
Probabilistic reasoning; Scales of measurement and implications for risk analysis [Lectures
4].
Risk, Cost, and Benefit Analysis (RCBA): Cost-benefit analysis (CBA); Evaluating non-
market priced goods and services; Death or morbidity averted in RCBA; Intergenerrational
equality; Subsidies and taxation [Lectures 4].
Exposure-response models for risk assessment: Maximum Likelyhood Estimator (MLE);
Basic statistical formulae; Empirical causal relations between exposure and response;
Logistic regression; Poisson regression; Survival analysis; Cox proportional (relative risk)
hazards model; Time series analysis; Model selection [Lectures 4].
Probabilistic dose-response models and concepts of toxicology: Risk assessment
through dose-response modelling; Multistage dose-response models; Moolgavkar, Venzon,
and Knudson Cancer model; Other dose-response models; Benchmark dose and
concentration [Lectures 4].
Methods of quantification of variability and uncertainty: Combinations of
distributions; Monte Carlo method; Bootstrap methods; Markov chain monte carlo; Entropy
of information [Lectures 4].
Casual models: Influence diagrams; Bayesian networks; Classification and regression
strategy [Lectures 2].
Meta-analysis, pooling sample data, and statistical decision rules: Pooling several
samples; Meta-analysis; Binomial population; Comparison of distributions; Statistical
decision making; Analysis of variance; Kruskal-Wallis test; K independent samples [Lectures
4].
Contingency tables in risk assessment and management: Chi-squared test; Measuring
agreement or conformity; sensitivity and specificity [Lectures 4].
Statistical associations and causation: Qualitative aspects of causal associations;
Pearson’s coefficient of correlation; Additional measures of association; Consistency of
scientific studies; Causal diagram in modelling causation [Lectures 4].
Risk assessment framework: Risk-based corrective action framework; US EPA Risk
assessment framework; Selected probability distributions; Poisson process in risk
assessment; Probabilistic risk assessment; Risk calculations in accident analysis; Simple
dynamic model of infection; Toxicological modelling for risk assessment [Lectures 4].
Decisions for risk management: Representing risky choices; Practice of making risky
decisions; Foundations of utility theory; Decision trees; Game theory [Lectures 4].
Text Books
1. Paolo F. Ricci (2010) Environmental and health Risk Assessment and Management:
Principles and practices. Springer. ISBN-10 1-4020-3776-7 (e-book)
Environmental Engineering Laboratory
Title Environmental Engineering
Laboratory
Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-4 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization
Stream
Elective
Prerequisite
Contents
Sr. No. Experiment Laboratory
1 Introduction to the requirements of National Accreditation
Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL)
accreditation of environmental laboratories
2 Introduction to laboratory and preliminary examination of
water (color, odor and taste)
3 Determination of pH, alkalinity, turbidity and optimum
coagulant dose, and conductivity
4 Determination of solids (total, dissolved, organic, inorganic
and settleable) and hardness
5 Determination of chloride, sulphates and sulfide in water
6 Determination of iron and manganese in water
7 Determination of DO and BOD in wastewater
8 Determination of nitrogen, phosphorus and fluoride in water
9 Determination of free and combined residual chlorine in water
10 Determination of coliforms in water
11 Demonstration of Analytical Instruments: water –related
12 Demonstration of Air (Particle and Gas-phase) and Noise
Pollution Monitoring Devices
13 Demonstration of Air Sampling Devices and Weather
Monitoring Station
Report on the Assessment of raw and treated water samples and efficacy of primary,
secondary and tertiary treatment stages of a wastewater treatment plant.
Text Books:
Chemistry for Environmental Engineering, Sawyer, C.N., McCarty, P.L., and Parkin,
G.F., Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, Fourth Edition, 2000.
Detailed course content of Program Electives
Stability of Slopes
Title Stability of Slopes Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To understand the influence of geology, rockmass properties, and hydrology on the
stability of slopes.
2. To present basic types of analytical and numerical methods of slope stability analysis.
3. To introduce methods and instruments of slope monitoring and stabilization.
4. To enable planning and design of preventive measures, and redesign of failed slopes.
Learning outcomes
1. Knowledge of data collection from field-work, aerial photography, geophysics, and
geological map.
2. Knowledge of kinematic analysis of slopes using geological data and stereographic
projection.
3. Knowledge of kinetic analysis of slopes and influence of critical geometrical and
hydrological parameters.
4. Knowledge of available methods of slope stabilization by reinforcements and rock
removal.
5. Knowledge of instrumental facilities to monitor slope movement and subsequent
classification.
Contents
Structural geology for slope analysis: Geological structures; Orientation of
discontinuities; Introduction to geological maps; Identification of modes of slope instability
[Lecture: 4]
Site investigation and geological data collection: Site reconnaissance; Geological
mapping; Spacing, persistence, and roughness of discontinuities; Probabilistic analysis of
structural geology; Drilling and logging. [Lecture: 4]
Rock strength properties: Scale effect and rock strength; Shear strength of
discontinuities; Laboratory testing of discontinuities; Hoek-Brown strength criterion for
fractured rock mass; Rock durability and compressive strength [Lecture: 4]
Plane failure: Conditions of plane failure; Influence of groundwater on stability; Critical
tension crack: identification and influence; Influence of critical slide plane inclination;
Analysis of failure on a rough plane; Reinforcement of a slope; Seismic analysis of slopes
[Lecture: 5]
Wedge failure: Conditions of wedge failure; Wedge analysis including cohesion, friction,
and water pressure; Wedge stability chart for friction; Compression wedge analysis [Lecture:
5]
Circular failure: Conditions of circular failure; Methods of analysis; Derivation and use of
circular failure charts; Location of critical slide surface and tension crack; Bishop’s and
Janbu’s method of failure analysis. [Lecture: 6]
Toppling failure: Types of toppling failure; Kinematic analysis of block toppling failure;
Limit equilibrium analysis of toppling [Lecture: 5]
Stabilization of slopes: Stablization programs: Rock slope Inventory, Hazard rating
analysis; Stabilization by rock reinforcements; Stabilization by rock removal; Measures
against rock fall [Lecture: 5]
Movement monitoring: Types of slope movement: Initial response, Regressive and
progressive movements, Long-term creep; Surface monitoring methods; Data interpretation
[Lecture: 4]
Text Books
1. Duncan C Wyllie, Christopher W. Mah (2005) Rock Slope Engineering, 4th Ed, Spon Press
(Taylor & Francis Group), ISBN 0–415–28001–X (pbk).
2. Robin Chowdhury, Phil Flentje, Gautam Bhattacharya (2010) Geotechnical Slope Analysis.
CRC Press (Taylor & Francis Group), ISBN: 978-0-415-46974-6 (Hbk).
Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering
Title Rock Mechanics and Rock
Engineering
Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To understand fundamentals of stress-train behavior of isotropic and anisotropic rocks
under different conditions
2. To understand limits of rock strength and analysis of rock failure conditions
3. To understand the influence anisotropy under at different scales
4. Introduction of use of rock mechanics in tunneling, mining engineering, and reservoir
geomechanics
Learning outcomes
1. Knowledge of geological and engineering classification of rocks.
2. Detailed knowledge of failure criteria and influence of ambient conditions
3. Knowledge of laboratory- and field-based stress measurement techniques
4. Understanding of isotropic and anisotropic rock deformation
5. Knowledge of tunneling in isotropic and anisotropic rocks
6. Knowledge of natural and artificial support system in underground excavations
7. Knowledge of wellbore stability and hydraulic fracturing
Contents
Classification and index properties of rocks: Geological classification of rocks; Index
properties of rocks; Porosity; Density; Hydraulic conductivity and permeability; Strength;
Slaking and durability; Sonic velocity; Classification of rock masses [Lectures 4].
Rock strength and failure criteria: Modes of failure; Laboratory strength tests; Stress-
strain behaviors in compression; Application of complete stress-strain curve; The Mohr-
Coulomb failure criterion; Hoek-Brown failure criterion; Effect of size, water, and anisotropy
on strength [Lectures 6].
Initial stresses in rocks and their measurement: Estimating the initial stresses;
Techniques for measurement of in-situ stresses; Determination of SHmin from leak-off tests;
Wellbore failure and the magnitude of SHmax; Drilling-induced tensile fracture and magnitude
of SHmax; Estimation of rock strength from breakouts [Lectures 5].
Planes of weakness in rocks: Joint orientation; Joint roughness; Relationship between
displacement and strength; Effect of water pressure [Lectures 5].
Deformability of rocks: Elastic and non-elastic behavior; Measurement of deformability
properties by static tests; Measurement of deformability properties by dynamic
measurement; Fractured rock; Influence of time on rock deformation [Lectures 6].
Rock mechanics for tunneling: Opening in competent rocks; Horizontally layered rocks;
Rock with inclined layers; Plastic behavior around tunnels; Time dependent behavior of
tunnels [Lectures 5].
Rock mechanics for mining engineering: Natural support: Pillar design approach, Pillar
strength equation, Model of pillar failure, Pillar stabilization; Artificial support: Rock support
interaction analysis, Classification, Primary reinforcement, Secondary support system; Rock
blasting process, control, and optimization [Lectures 5].
Rock mechanics for hydrocarbon reservoir: Tectonic stress field; Pore pressure
measurement; Mechanical properties and stress data from laboratory analysis and field data;
Concepts of critically stressed crust; Basics of hydraulic fracturing; Wellbore stability
[Lectures 6].
Text Books
1. Richard E. Goodman (1989) Introduction to Rock Mechanics (2nd Ed). Wiley. ISBN-
10: 0471812005.
2. Mark D. Zoback. (2007) Reservoir Geomechncs. Cambridge University Press. ISBN-
978-0-521-77069-9.
3. Debasis Deb, Abhiram Kumar Verma (2016) Fundamentals and Applications of Rock
Mechanics. PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. ISBN-978-81-203-5182-0.
Onlin Online course Material
1. V. B. Maji. Rock Mechanics – Web course. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106055/
Reliability Engineering
Title Reliability Engineering Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD,
Ph.D
Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite Nil
Objectives:
This course aims at:
1. Introducing basic principles of statistics, uncertainty and reliability analysis.
2. Enhancing engineering knowledge and specialist techniques to prevent/reduce the
likelihood of failures of structures.
3. Introduction of different methods of reliability analysis in Civil Engineering.
Learning Outcomes:
The students will have the ability to:
1. Analyze the statistical moments of input random variables and the output
performance function.
2. Determine the probability of failure, reliability index and safety factors of limit state
functions.
3. Analytical knowledge of different levels of reliability used for structures.
4. Perform reliability based design on different limit states.
5. Apply finite element based reliability analysis to structural components and
systems.
Contents:
Introduction to Reliability Engineering: Concepts of structural safety, limit state and
reliability; types of uncertainty; reliability analysis and its importance [Lectures 2].
Basics of statistics and probability: Basic statistics; theory of probability; probability
distribution function; hypothesis testing [Lectures 3].
Resistance parameters and distributions: Statistics of material properties and strength;
dimensional variations; allowable stresses [Lectures 3].
Simulation based study of structural safety: Monte Carlo method; Latin hypercube
sampling; advanced sampling techniques [Lectures 3].
Level 2 reliability methods: Basic variables and failure surface; first order second
moment method [Lectures 3].
Gradient based methods: first and second order methods; independent, correlated,
normal and non-normal random variables based limit states [Lectures 5].
Response surface based methods: Conventional response surface method; advanced
response surface methods with examples [Lectures 4].
Reliability based design: Stochastic models of loads; determination of partial safety
factors; code calibration; safety checking format [Lectures 4].
Reliability of structural systems: System reliability – series and parallel; bounds on
system reliability; modelling of structural systems [Lectures 3].
Advanced reliability methods: Importance sampling method; subset simulation method;
stochastic response surface method [Lectures 3].
Brief on advanced topics: Fatigue reliability estimation; S-N curve approach; time-
dependent reliability [Lectures 3].
Design optimization: Introduction to the concept of design optimization; examples on
solving reliability based design optimization problems [Lectures 3].
Application of reliability analysis and design: applications to steel, concrete, offshore
structures etc. to determine probability of failure and safe design [Lectures 3].
Text Books:
1. P. Thoft-Christensen and M.J. Baker (1982) Structural Reliability: Theory and its
Applications, Springer-Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-68699-3.
2. A.H.S. Ang and W. H. Tang (1984) Probability Concepts in Engineering Planning and
Design Vol. II Decision, Risk and Reliability, John Wiley and Sons, New York. ISBN
978-0-471-03201-4
3. P. Thoft-Christensen and Y. Murotsu (1986) Applications of Structural Systems
Reliability Theory, Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-82766-2.
4. O. Ditlevsen and H.O. Madsen (1996) Structural Reliability Methods, John Wiley &
Sons Ltd, Chichester. ISBN 978-0-471-96086-7.
5. S.-K. Choi, R.V. Grandhi and R.A. Canfield (2007) Reliability-based Structural
Design, Springer-Verlag, London. ISBN 978-1-84628-444-1.
6. R. Ranganathan (2011) Structural Reliability Analysis and Design (3rd Ed), Jaico
Publishing House, Mumbai. ISBN 81-7224-851-2.
7. R.E. Melchers and A.T. Beck (2018) Structural Reliability Analysis and Prediction
(3rd Ed), John Wiley and Sons Ltd, Hoboken, NJ. ISBN 978-1-119-26599-3.
Additional References:
1. Reliability Engineering (2009) by Prof. G.L. Sivakumar Babu on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/108/105108128/
2. Structural Reliability (2014) by Dr. Arunasis Chakraborty on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/103/105103140/
3. Risk and Reliability of Offshore Structures (2016) by Prof. Srinivasan
Chandrasekaran on NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/114/106/114106041/
Structural Dynamics
Title Structural Dynamics Number CIE7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD,
Ph.D
Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite Nil
Objectives:
This course aims at:
1. Introducing the behaviour of structures (especially framed building) to various
dynamic loads, viz. earthquake, machine vibration etc.
2. Fundamental understanding to analyze structures subjected to dynamic excitation
and computing quantities like displacements, forces, stresses etc.
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize
physical insight.
4. Problem solving ability for dynamic response in Civil Engineering design.
Learning Outcomes:
Students will have the ability to:
 Establish dynamic equilibrium and equation of motion for structural systems.
 Analyze the dynamic response and stress generation in single and multi degree of
freedom systems for different types of loading.
 Implement the basis for the classical energy formulations in dynamical systems.
 Model structural damping and solve problems in frequency as well as time domain.
 Solve the eigenvalue problems and gain knowledge on its useful properties.
 Device methods to protect new and existing structures against seismic collapse.
 Apply the structural dynamics theory to real-world problems like seismic analysis
and design of structures.
Contents:
 Basics of structural dynamics: Introduction to dynamic loading and response; types
of analysis - static and dynamic loads; degrees of freedom; lumped mass; types of
mass-spring-damper system; formulation of equation of motion for structural
dynamics using direct equilibration, principle of virtual displacement and Hamilton’s
principle [Lectures 4].
 Free vibration of single degree of freedom (SDOF) system: Undamped free vibration
and its solution; natural period and frequency; energy in free vibration; damped free
vibration; types of damping; concept of logarithmic decrement [Lectures 4].
 Forced vibration of SDOF system: Undamped forced vibration and its solution;
amplitude and phase angle; dynamic amplification factor; damped forced vibration
[Lectures 3].
 Force transmission and vibration measurement: Resonant frequency and half power
band width; force transmission and isolation; design of vibration measuring
instruments [Lectures 3].
 Response to harmonic and periodic motions: Response of SDOF systems to harmonic
loads and periodic excitations; Fourier series representation [Lectures 4].
 Response to arbitrary motions: Response of SDOF systems to unit impulse excitation,
arbitrary force (solution using Duhamel's integral), step and ramp forces, rectangular
pulse and half sinusoidal waves [Lectures 4].
 Numerical methods of solution: Determining the dynamics response using methods
such as time stepping methods, central difference method and Newmark's method
[Lectures 4].
 Response spectrum: Concept of response spectrum; uses of response spectrum;
complex frequency transfer function; development of tripartite plot; base shear and
bending moment; response of structure in frequency domain [Lectures 4].
 Multi-degree of freedom (MDOF) systems: Equation of motion for MDOF system;
solution of equation, matrix properties; natural frequencies and mode shapes; static
condensation; modal orthogonality; mode superposition analysis of MDOF system;
approximate method for finding natural frequency [Lectures 5].
 Earthquake response of MDOF systems: Time history analysis; response spectrum
analysis [Lectures 2].
 Dynamic response of continuous systems: Vibration of continuous systems; axial
vibration of prismatic bar; flexural vibration of beams; shear and bending behaviour;
generalized SDOF [Lectures 3].
 Applications: Introduction to finite element method; formation of element stiffness,
mass and force matrices; examples for seismic analysis and response [Lectures 2].
Text Books:
1. J.M. Biggs (1964) Introduction to Structural Dynamics, McGraw Hill, NY. ISBN 07-
005255-7.
2. R.W. Clough and J. Penzien (1993) Dynamics of Structures (2nd Ed), McGraw Hill
Inc Editor. ISBN 0-07-011392-0.
3. A.K. Chopra (2017) Dynamics of Structures Theory and Application to Earthquake
Engineering (5th Ed), Prentice Hall, NJ. ISBN 978-0-134-55512-6.
4. A.K. Jain (2017) Dynamics of Structures with MATLAB® Applications, Pearson
Education, Chennai, India. ISBN 978-9-332-55855-7
5. M. Paz and Y.H. Kim (2019) Structural Dynamics Theory and Computation (6th Ed),
Springer Nature, Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-319-94742-6.
Additional References:
1. Structural Dynamics (2012) by Dr. Pradipta Banerji on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101006/
2. Structural Dynamics (2016) by Prof. Ramancharala Pradeep Kumar on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106151/
3. Structural Dynamics for Civil Engineers - SDOF Systems (2019) by Prof. Riya
Catherine George on NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/104/105104189/
Wind and Earthquake Engineering
Title Wind and Earthquake Engineering Number
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To acquaint the students with the fundamental knowledge of wind and earthquake
engineering to pursue higher level courses/research on the wind and earthquake
engineering
2. To provide the requisite information on the above two subjects to the students to work
in design offices.
3. To impart the back ground materials for pursuing some courses offered in the fields of
specialization (cores).
Learning Outcomes
1. Enable the students to apply the knowledge gained in solving practical problems.
2. Enable the students to analyze the collected wind and earthquake data for providing
systematic inputs to be used in practice.
3. To make the students capable of using the knowledge gained for wind and earthquake
hazard mapping.
Contents
Atmospheric wind circulation, its mechanism, types of wind, wind measurements, wind
characteristic, different ways to express wind energy, inputs required for the analysis of
structures, aero dynamic and aero-elastic effects, aero elastic instabilities-flutter, galloping,
torsional divergence, dynamics in the wind codes [lectures 20].
Inside of the earth and tectonic plate movement, major tectonic plates, fault lines, tectonic
theory of the occurrence of the earthquake, earthquake hazards, earthquake input for
structural analysis, concept of the response spectrum, deterministic seismic analysis of
structures, salient features of earthquake code [lectures 20].
Text Books
1. Ghosh S K and Fanella D A, Seismic and Wind Design of Concrete Buildings,
International Code Council-New York (2004).
2. Taranath B S, Wind and Earthquake Resistant Buildings: Structural Analysis and
Design, Marcel Dekker, New York (2004).
Others:
1. Datta T K, Seismic Analysis of Structures, John Wiley & Sons, New York (2010).
2. IS 1893-Part-I, Criteria for Earthquake Resistant Design of Structures: General
Provisions and Buildings, Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi (2016).
Offshore Geo-technology
Title Offshore Geo-technology Number CIVIL7XX0
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech -Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To familiarize students with the dynamics of offshore environment.
2. To introduce methods of soil and site investigation.
3. To introduce designs, types, and analyses of piled foundation, shallow foundation, and
anchoring systems.
4. To introduce specific consideration of soil structure interaction of on-bottom and pipelines
and risers.
5. To provide overview of geo-hazards.
Learning outcomes:
1. Detailed knowledge of geophysical, geotechnical investigation, laboratory test and use
of centrifuge modelling.
2. Understanding of soil response under static and dynamic loads.
3. Knowledge of the analysis and design of shallow foundation, piled foundation, anchoring
system and on-bottom pipelines and risers.
4. Understanding of marine slope failure and slides.
Contents:
Offshore environment: Marine geology, Plate tectonics, Continental self, Marine-
sediments, Geotechnical characteristics, Ocean wind and waves, currents, wave theories,
hydrodynamic forces (Lectures 7).
Offshore site and soil investigation: Geophysical and Geotechnical investigations; Soil
classifications and tests- undrained tri-axial compression test, undrained strength; cyclic
loading test, failure under cyclic loading, Centrifuge modelling [Lectures 7].
Offshore foundations: Shallow and deep foundations and their applications, Design of
offshore foundations as per API and DNV codes, Pile drivability and dynamic monitoring,
Capacity of driven piles, Installation piled and shallow foundations in fine grained and
permeable sediments, Stability of shallow foundations, Dynamic analysis of vertical and
inclined pile foundations, Impedance function of piles and frequency domain analysis
[lectures 10].
Anchoring systems: Buoyant platforms and mooring systems, Mooring line analysis and
forces on anchors, Types of anchors and their design; API and DNV code provisions for
anchor design, Dynamic effects on anchor and uplift of anchors, Dynamically penetrating
anchors [Lectures 7].
Pipeline and riser geotechnics: Geotechnical inputs to pipeline design; Design issues and
code provisions; Soil structure interaction for on-bottom pipelines and risers, Secondary
stabilization [Lecture 6]
Offshore geo-hazard: Types of marine geo-hazard and their identification, Submarine
slope failures and slides, probabilistic hazard analysis [Lectures 5].
Text Books:
1. Mark Randolph, Susan Gourvenec (2011). Offshore Geotechnical Engineering. Spon
Press (Taylor & Francis), ISBN13: 978-0-415-47744-4(hbk).
2. Paolo Boccotti (2000). Wave Mechanics for Ocean Engineering (1st Ed), Elsevier
Science. ISBN: 9780080543727 (eBook)
Green Building and Sustainable Materials
Title Green building and
Sustainable Materials
Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives: Objectives of this course are:
1. To introduce elents of green building construction and use of sustainable materials.
2. To familiarize students with different national and international green performance
ratings.
3. To teach students methods of carbon footprint reduction and increase in energy
efficiency of a building.
Learning Outcomes: A graduate of this course will have a thorough idea of:
1. National and international green building assessment system and requirements.
2. Green building design elements and use of sustainable materials.
3. Techniques to reduce the carbon footprint of a green building.
4. Management of hydrological cycle, treatment of waste, and maintainance of indoor
air quality.
5. Green building economics, business plan, and management.
Contents
Introduction to green building: Rationale for high-performance green building; green building
progress and obstacles; trends in high-performance green building; the green building
movement. (Lectures: 3)
Ecological design: design vs ecological design; contemporary ecological design; future
ecological design; thermodynamics: limits on recycling and the dissipation of materials
(Lectures: 3)
Green building assessment: US green building assessment system; international green building
assessment system; performance assessment. (Lectures: 3)
LEED building rating system: history of LEED; structure of the LEED suite of building assessment
systems; LEED credentials; the LEED process; LEED categories. (Lectures: 3)
The Green Globes building assessment system: the Green Globes process; Green Globes
verification and certification; structure of the ANSI/GBI 01-2010 standard; the Green Globes
professional and Green Globes Assessor. (Lectures: 3)
Green building design process: conventional vs green building delivery systems;
executing the green building project; the integrated design progress; role of Charrette in
the design process; green building documentation requirements. (Lectures: 3)
Sustainable site and landscape: land and landscape approaches for green buildings;
sustainable landscapes; enhancing ecosystems; stormwater management; low-impact
development; heat island mitigation; light trespass and pollution reduction; sustainable site
initiative. (Lectures: 3)
Energy and carbon footprint reduction: building energy issues; high-performance
building energy design strategy; passive design strategy; building envelope; internal load
reduction; active mechanical system; water-heating system; electrical power systems;
innovative energy optimization strategies; renewable energy systems; fuel cells; smart
buildings and energy management systems; ozone-depleting chemicals in HVAC&R systems;
reducing carbon footprint of the built environment. (Lectures: 4)
Built environment hydrological cycle: global water resource depletion; hydrological cycle
terminology; high-performance building hydrological cycle strategy; designing the high-
performance building hydrological cycle; water budget rules of thumb; sustainable
stormwater management; landscaping water efficiency. (Lectures: 4)
Closing materials loops: distinguishing between green building products and green
building materials; LCA of building materials and products; environmental product
declaration; materials and product certification systems; emerging construction materials
and products; design for deconstruction. (Lectures: 4)
Indoor environmental quality: IEQ issues; design; main components of integrated IEQ
design; emission from building materials; economic benefits of good indoor environmental
quality. (Lectures: 3)
Construction operations and commissioning: site protection planning; indoor air quality
during construction; construction materials management; construction and demolition waste
management. (Lectures: 3)
Green building economics: the business case for high-performance green building; the
economics of green building; quantifying green building benefits. (Lectures: 3)
Text Books
1. Charles J. Kibert (2013). Sustainable Construction. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-
118-33013-5
2. J. Newman and Ban Sang Choo (2003) Advanced Concrete Technology-Constituent
Materials (1st Ed), Elsevier. ISBN 9780080489988.
3. S. Kubba (2010) LEED Practices, Certification, and Accreditation Hand book (1st Ed)
Elsevier. ISBN 9780080958590.
Additional materials:
1. Ministry of Power, Energy Conservation Building Code 2018, Revised Version, Bureau
of Energy Efficiency, 2018,
2. Indian Building Congress, Practical Handbook on Energy Conservation in Buildings, 1
st ed. Nabhi Publication, 2008.
3. TERI-Griha’s Green Design practices (www.teriin.org/bcsd/griha/griha.htm)
4. Sartori, I., and Hestnes, A. G. “Energy use in the life cycle of conventional and low-
energy buildings: A review article”, Energy and Buildings., 20, 249-257.2007
5. Green Building Basics, California Integrated Waste Management Board
(www.ciwmb.ca.gov/GREENBUILDING/Basics.htm#What)
6. Catarina Thormark. “A low energy building in a life cycle—its embodied energy,
energy need for operation and recycling potential”, Building and Environment., 37,
429-435.2001.
Online course Material
“NOC:Energy Efficiency, Acoustics and daylighting in Building” by Prof. B. Bhattacharjee on
NTPEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102175/
Traffic Flow Theory
Title Traffic Flow Theory Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives: The course will introduce students to:
1. Fundamentals of traffic flow
2. Analysis of traffic flow
3. Traffic flow modelling approaches
Learning Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student should be able to:
1. Differentiate and analyse traffic flow parameters at micro-macro levels
2. Analyse congestion propagation in traffic flow
3. Understand the state-of-the-art traffic flow modelling
4. Perform traffic flow modelling and analysis using field data
Contents
Introduction to Traffic Flow theory: Macroscopic parameters – Space mean speed,
Density, and Flow; Microscopic parameters – Time mean speed, Time headway, Space
headway, occupancy; Relation between microscopic and macroscopic parameters;
Fundamental traffic flow equation [Lectures 6].
Macroscopic models of Traffic flow: Empirical and theoretical models, Continuity
equations, Solution to linear and non-linear partial differential equations, Two fluid model
[Lectures 10].
Microscopic Models of Traffic flow: Car following models, Response Stimulus model,
Psychophysical model, stability, Advanced car following models [Lectures 10].
Propagation of disturbance: Non-linear traffic waves and acceleration of stream,
Shockwave theory and applications [Lectures 6].
Analysis of traffic flow: Accumulation diagrams, Incidents, Probabilistic analysis of
traffic flow, Gap acceptance theory, Queuing theory and applications [Lectures 10].
Text Books
1. Ni, D. Traffic flow Theory. BH, Elsevier, MA, USA.
2. Adolf D. May. Traffic flow fundamentals. Copyright: Prentice Hall, Inc
3. Nicholas J Garber and Lester A Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. Copyright:
Brooks/Cole-Wadsworth Group\Thomson learning
4. Fred. L. Mannering, Walter P. Kilareski, and Scott S. Washburn. Principles of
Highway Engineering and Traffic Analysis. Copyright: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
5. C. Jotin Khisty and B. Kent Lall. Transportation Engineering. Copyright; Pearson
Education, Inc.
Additional references:
1. Kadiyali. L. R. (2016).Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Khanna
Publishers
2. Chakroborty, P., Animesh Das (2017). Principles of Transportation Engineering.
Second Edition, PHI Learning Private Limited
3. Saxena S. C. (2014). Textbook of Highway and Traffic engineering. CBS
4. Samuel Morgan (2016) Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Williford Pr.
5. Jaume Barceló. (2010) Fundamentals of Traffic Simulation. Springer.
6. Roess, R.P., Prassas E. S., McShane W. R. (2010) Traffic Engineering. Pearson
Traffic System and Management
Title Traffic System and
Management
Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives: The course will introduce students to:
1. Traffic system characteristics
2. Traffic control system
3. Traffic studies and basic analysis
4. Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)
Learning Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student should be able to:
1. Understand in-depth the data collection methods and analysis of various traffic flow
parameters
2. Design traffic control systems
3. Have adequate exposure to various traffic management measures
4. Understand the fundamentals and applications of ITS
Contents
Traffic Systems Characteristics: User, Vehicle and Traffic characteristics [Lectures 6].
Traffic Studies and Basic Analysis: Speed, journey time, and delay studies, Volume
and occupancy studies, Origin-destination Studies, Parking studies, Accident Studies.
Capacity and Level of Service (LOS) analysis [Lectures 10].
Traffic Control System: Road markings – Principles of road markings, carriageway
markings and object markings; Traffic signs – Importance of traffic signs, Types of traffic
signs; Intersection control, Signal design- Illustration of signals, fixed time signals, signal
design using IRC method and HCM method [Lectures 12].
Traffic Management: Strategies and techniques, Traffic calming, congestion studies
and road pricing [Lectures 8].
Intelligent Transportation system: User services and architecture, standards and
evaluation, Public Transport and bus priority, Artificial intelligence in advanced traffic and
ITS [Lectures 6].
Text Books
1. Nicholas J Garber and Lester A Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. Copyright:
Brooks/Cole-Wadsworth Group\Thomson learning
2. Fred. L. Mannering, Walter P. Kilareski, and Scott S. Washburn. Principles of
Highway Engineering and Traffic Analysis. Copyright: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
3. C. Jotin Khisty and B. Kent Lall. Transportation Engineering. Copyright; Pearson
Education, Inc.
4. https://coeut.iitm.ac.in/ITS_synthesis.pdf
5. Sussman, J. Perspectives on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). New York,
NY: Springer, 2005
Additional references:
1. Kadiyali. L. R. (2016).Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Khanna
Publishers
2. Chakroborty, P., Animesh Das (2017). Principles of Transportation Engineering.
Second Edition, PHI Learning Private Limited
3. Roess, R.P., Prassas E. S., McShane W. R. (2010) Traffic Engineering. Pearson
Environmental Aspects of Power Plant
Title Environmental Aspects of
Power Plant
Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-0 [1]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To provide basic knowledge of combustion and conversion technologies.
2. To make students familiar with emissions, pre- and post-combustion control
technologies and waste management techniques.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
1. Identifying the issues and appropriately choose the right pollution control technique
for gas and particle phase emissions.
2. Assessing the efficiency of conventional as well as emerging combustion technologies
targeting pollution reduction.
Contents
Introduction: Types of emissions Types of pollutants (SOx, NOx, CO, trace elements and
other Coal Combustion Products) and their impacts, Emission standards [Lectures 2].
Combustion Technologies: Gasification, Types of gasifiers, Gasification vs Combustion,
Fluidized bed combustion (FBC), Concept of Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC),
IGCC vs pulverized coal combustion (PCC) [Lectures 5].
Pre- and Post-combustion Control: Flue gas desulfurization (FGD), NOx and SOx
treatments (low NOx burners, flue gas recirculation and SCR), Particulate matter control
systems (Electrostatic precipitators, mechanical collectors and other devices (particulate
scrubbers, baghouse filters, fabric filters etc.) [Lectures 5].
Ash handling: Ash (fly ash, bottom ash, pond ash, FBC ash, boiler slag, FGD ash); Scrubber
slurry; Ash Handling and Sustainable practices, leaching aspects [Lectures 2].
Text Books
1. Fuels and Fuel Technology, F. Peter, A.Wheatan & Co. Ltd., First edition, 1965.
2. Fuels and Combustion, S. Sarkar, Orient Longman, Second edition, 1990.
3. Hydrogen and Syngas Production and Purification Technologies, Ke Liu, C. Song and
V. Subramani, John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
4. The Chemistry and Technology of Coal, J. G. Speight, CRC Press, 2013.
Soil Stabilization and Ground Improvement
Title Soil Stabilization and
Ground Improvement
Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives: This course will introduce:
1. Scopes of soil stabilization and ground improvement in various geotechnical
projects.
2. Different conventional and advanced method of ground improvement and their
applications.
3. Role of ground water and soil types on the stability of soil covers and grounds.
Learning Outcomes: A graduate of this course will have a thorough knowledge of:
1. Behaviour of soils under different environmental conditions and their compaction
behavior.
2. Role and planning of drainage to enhance stability of grounds.
3. Different mechanical, chemical, and cmenting stabilization techniques regularly
used in stabilization programs.
4. Use of geosynthetics and influence of their properties on ground improvement.
5. Elements of grouting and injection to increase soil stabilization.
Contents
Formation and development of ground: Formation of rock, soil, and soil profile; Soil
distribution in India; alteration of ground after formation; reclaimed soil; ground
improvement potential [Lectures 3].
Compaction: compaction mechanics; field procedure; surface compaction; selection of
field compaction procedures; compaction quality control [Lectures 5].
Drainage methods: seepage; filter requirements; groundwater; methods of dewatering
systems; design steps for dewatering systems; drains [Lectures 5].
Precompression and vertical drains: compressibility of soils and consolidation; pre-
loading and surface fills; vertical drains; dynamic consolidation; consolidation by electro-
osmosis [Lectures 5].
Vibration methods: vibro-compression; vibro-displacement compression [Lectures 5].
Grouting and injection: aspects of grouting; grouting procedure; applications
[Lectures 5].
Mechanical, cementing, and chemical stabilization: requirements of soil
stabilization; mechanical stabilization; Portland cement stabilization; bituminous
stabilization; chemical stabilization; construction methods [Lectures 4].
Geosynthetics: geosynthetic types; properties of geosynthetics; applications of
geosynthetics [Lectures 4].
Contemporary soil improvement techniques: soil reinforcement; thermal methods;
other simple methods; improving rock stability and quality [Lectures 5].
Case histories of ground improvement: traditional ground improvements adopted in
weak soils in India and abroad; codal suggestions [Lectures 2].
Text Books
1. Dr. Purushottama Raj (2005). Ground Improvement Techniques. Laxmi
Publications. ISBN: 9788170088370.
2. Hausmann, M.R. (1990). Engineering Principles of Ground Modification, McGraw-Hill
International Editions. ISBN: 9780070272798.
3. Bowles J.E. (1997). Foundation Analysis and Design (5th Ed). Tata McGraw-Hill
International Edition. ISBN 0-07-912247-7.
Online course Material
1. Ground Improvement Techniques by Dr. G.L. Sivakumar Babu on NTPEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/108/105108075/
Foundation Engineering
Title Foundation Engineering Number
Department Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives: this course aims at :
1. Introducing basic principles and methods of foundation design and constructions.
2. Introducing different ambient conditions that influence the stability of a foundation
in short and long-term.
3. Introducing methods of stable foundations in earthquake prone areas.
Learning Outcomes: Students will have the ability to
1. Analyze the properties of soil and rock to design appropriate foundations.
2. Analytical knowledge of short-term and long-term consolidation behavior of
foundations.
3. Device methods to protect new and historical foundations against decay and
collapse.
4. Design earthquake resistant foundation in different soils and rocks.
5. Apply international and national codes to study soil and design foundations.
6.
Contents
Shallow and deep foundation: selection of foundation type; shallow foundations; deep
foundation [Lectures 3].
Bearing capacity of foundations: Bearing capacity of shallow foundations; bearing
capacity of deep foundations; lateral load capacity of deep foundations; geotechnical
earthquake engineering [Lectures 3].
Settlement of foundations: Collapsible soil; settlement of cohecionless soil; other
common causes of settlement; foundation on rock; allowable settlement [Lectures 3].
Consolidation: laboratory consolidation test; immediate settlement; primary
consolidation; rate of primary consolidation; secondary compression; consolidation of
soil beneath shallow foundation; consolidation of soil beneath deep foundation;
settlement of unsaturated cohesive soil [Lectures 3].
Foundation of expansive soil: expansion potential; basic expansive soil principles;
prediction of foundation movement; foundation design for expansive soil; flatwork;
expansive rock [Lectures 3].
Retaining walls: simple retaining wall without wall friction; simple retaining wall with
friction; design and construction of retaining walls; restrained retaining walls;
mechanically stabilized earth retaining walls; sheet pile walls; temporary retaining walls;
moisture migration through basement walls [Lectures 4].
Foundation deterioration and cracking: timber decay; sulfate attack on concrete;
frost; historic structures; shrinkage cracking; moisture migration through slab-on-grade
foundations [Lectures 4].
Geotechnical earthquake engineering: seismological concepts; ground motion
parameters; dynamic soil behavior; ground response analysis; liquefaction; slope
stability [Lectures 4].
Seismic strengthening/retrofitting methods for foundations: earthquake
structural damage; foundation settlement; retaining walls; foundation alternatives to
mitigate earthquake effects [Lectures 4].
Grading and other soil improvement methods: grading; compaction; soil
improvement methods [Lectures 4].
Foundation excavation, underpinning, and field load tests: foundation excavation
and construction; field load tests; foundation underpinning; observational method.
[Lectures 4].
Subsurface investigation and instrumentations: traditional in-situ investigations;
advanced geophysical tests; field instrumentations [Lectures 3].
International building code for foundations: general regulations for footing and
foundations; foundation adjacent slopes; retaining walls; geotechnical earthquake
engineering [Lectures 3].
Text Books
1. Bowles JE (1997) Foundation Analysis and Design (5th Ed). Tata-McGraw Hill
International Edition. ISBN 0-07-912247-7.
2. Robert W. day (2010). Foundation Engineering Handbook (2nd Ed). McGraw-Hill
Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-174010-4.
3. Budhu. M (2012). Soil Mechanics and Foundations (3 rd Ed). John Wiley and Sons.
ISBN: 978-0-470-55684-9.
4. Robert W. day (2010). Foundation Engineering Handbook (2 nd Ed). McGraw-Hill
Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-174010-4.Manjriker
Additional references
Foundation Engineering (2018) by Prof. Kousik Deb on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105176/
Advanced Mechanics of Solids
Title Advanced Mechanics of
Solids
Number
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. Enable students to learn advanced concepts of stress analysis
2. Apply concepts to analysis of mechanical systems such as rotating disks, thick
cylinders etc.
Learning Outcomes
1. Develop Ability to solve advanced stress analysis problems using analytical and
numerical methods
2. Ability to formulate and solve 3D problems in stress analysis
Contents
Introduction to Cartesian tensors, Stress: Normal and shear stress, Equilibrium
equations (force and moment), Symmetry of shear tensor, Equilibrium at boundary
(Cauchy Equation). 2-D problems Plane stress, Stress transformation, Principal stresses,
maximum shear stress, Mohr’s circle [Lectures 7].
Displacements and strains, Green’s strain, Compatibility condition, Plane strain Problems,
Strain transformation, Strain gage and rosette [Lectures 5].
Structural Approximations: Physical and mathematical. Structural elements-bars,
beams, plates, membrane, shear panel, shells [Lectures 1].
Mechanical behavior of Engineering Materials, Effect of Temperature, Anisotropic,
Isotropic, Orthotropic materials, Failure Criteria (Distortion strain energy, Octahedral
shear stress) Maximum normal stress, Maximum Shear stress (Tresca), Maximum
distortion energy (von-Mises and Hencky) [Lectures 4].
Theory of Elasticity, Plane Stress Problem with Stress formulation in 2-D, Plane Strain
Problem with Stress Formulation in 2-D, Airy’s stress function, stress, strain and
equilibrium in polar coordinates, Displacement formulation with plane stress, St. Venant’s
Principle [Lectures 4].
Bending and extension of beams, stress-resultants, Equilibrium equations in terms of
deformation with transverse and axial load [Lectures 3].
Torsion of slender bodies (beams), Prandtl stress function formulation, Membrane
analogy, Closed form beam torsion analytical solution, Warping function formulation, Thin
Walled open sections, Torsion constants for rolled and extruded beams, Thin walled
closed sections, Shear flow [Lectures 8].
Beam shearing stresses due to shear forces, Shear Centre [Lectures 3].
Euler Buckling [Lectures 3].
Principle of virtual-work [Lectures 4].
Text Books
1. Srinath, L.S. (2009), Advanced Solid Mechanics, Tata McGraw-Hill
2. Timoshenko, S.P., and Goodier, J.N. (1980), Theory of Elasticity, Tata McGraw- Hill
3. Sadd, M. H. (2006), Elasticity: Theory, Applications and Numerics, Academic Press
Online course Material
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106049/
Theory of Vibration
Title Theory of Vibrations Number MEL7XX0
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of mechanical
vibrations
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide the approach adopted for analyzing the structural dynamic characteristics and
dynamic response of uniform and non-uniform structural elements, like beams.
2. The approach is applicable for structural dynamic analysis of any structure.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Analyze the vibration characteristics of non-uniform beams.
2. Thorough understanding of approximate methods used in the structural dynamic
analysis.
Contents
Introduction: Discrete and continuous systems, SDOF, Types of Damping, Frequency
response, Time response, Beating phenomenon, Response to impulse loading, Convolution
integral, Numerical integration, Newmark-β method, Wilson-θ method [Lectures 9].
Rayleigh’s Method: Approximate evaluation of natural frequency, improved Rayleigh’s
method [Lectures 4].
Stiffness and flexibility influence coefficients, finite element stiffness of beam elements, Static
condensation [Lectures 5].
Hamilton’s principle, Lagrange’s equations [Lectures 3].
Linear conservative natural systems: Symmetric eigenvalue problem, Modal analysis,
Systems with proportional damping, structural damping (complex stiffness) [Lectures 4].
Continuous parameter systems: Longitudinal vibration of bars, bending vibration of
beams, torsion vibration [Lectures 4].
Differential Eigenvalue Problem: Admissible function, Comparison function, Eigen
function [Lectures 2].
Positive definite system, self adjoint property [Lectures 2].
Natural modes of vibration: Mode shapes and natural frequencies [Lectures 2].
Approximate methods: Transfer Matrix method, Rayleigh’s quotient, Rayleigh-Ritz method,
Galerkin method [Lectures 5].
Response to excitation: Mode summation, Mode acceleration [Lectures 2].
Reference Books
1. Meirovitch, L., Principles and Techniques of Vibrations, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall
2. Meirovitch, L., Analytical Methods in Vibration Analysis, Macmillan
3. Clough, R.W., and Penzien, J., Dynamics of Structures, McGraw Hill
Online course Material
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105101006/
Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
Title Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1]
Offered for B. Tech./ M.Tech./M.Tech.-Ph.D./ Ph.D. Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite Thermodynamics
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide understanding of Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) cycles, hybrid OTEC
systems and technological challenges.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the:
1. 1. Proper knowledge about Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) cycles and hybrid OTEC
technologies.
2. 2. Ability to understand OTEC design challenges.
vi Contents
Ocean as a Heat Engine: Concepts of ocean thermal energy, Favourable temperature
difference, OTEC history [Lectures 2].
OTEC Cycles: Closed OTEC cycles, Open OTEC cycle, Flow diagrams, Comparison of OTEC
Cycles, Products of OTEC: electricity, desalinated water, cold water for air-conditioning etc.,
Hybrid OTEC systems [Lectures 6].
OTEC System Design: System components, Heat exchangers, evaporators, Pumps,
Turbines, Piping, Platform concepts, Dual Purpose OTEC Plants, Challenges, Case studies
[Lectures 6].
Textbook
1. Takahashi, Patrick and Trenka, Andrew, (1996) Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion, Ist ed.,
Wiley.
Reference Books
1. Lockerby,R.W., (1981) Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC), US Department of
Energy, United States.
Process safety and Hazards
Title Process safety and Hazards Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective
The Instructor will:
 Provide comprehensive knowledge of safety regulations and their practices,
chemical plant hazards and their control, risk assessment and management
principles and techniques and accident analysis.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
 Identify and distinguish typical sources of risk and hazard in a process plant,
undertake hazard and operability (HAZOP) study.
Contents
Safety in Industries: Concepts and definition, storage of dangerous materials, Plant
layout Safety systems, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) incidence
rate, Fatal accident rate (FAR), Measures to take during accidents, Toxicology [Lectures
10].
Industrial Hygiene: Government regulations, Industrial hygiene and safety aspects
related to toxicity, noise, pressure, temperature, vibrations, radiation etc, Evaluation
Methods, Evaluating workers Exposures to dusts, noise [Lectures 8].
Selection Mechanism: Technology and process selection, Scale of disaster, Fire
triangle Ignition, Confined and unconfined explosion, Vapors cloud explosions, Boiling
liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE), Dust explosion, shock wave, Flammability
characteristics of liquids and vapors, Minimum oxygen concentration (MOC) and Inerting
[Lectures 8].
Handling Chemicals and toxicity: Control of toxic chemicals, Storage and handling
of flammable and toxic chemical, Runway reactions, Relief system risk and hazards
management, Design to prevent Fires and Explosions, Miscellaneous Design for
preventing Fires and Explosion [Lectures 8].
Hazards Identification: checklists, Surveys, Hazard and Operability Studies (HAZOP),
Safety reviews. Risk Assessment, Hazard models and risk data. Tackling disasters, plan
for emergency. Risk management routines, Emergency shutdown systems, Role of
computers in safety, Prevention of hazard human element, Technology and process
selection [Lectures 8].
Text Books
1. Daniel A. Crowl and Joseph F. Louvar, 1990, Chemical Process Safety:
Fundamentals with applications, Prentice Hall, Inc.
2. Lee, F.P., 1983, Loss prevention in the process Industries, Volume 1 and 2
Butterworth.
3. Hoboken, N. J., 2000, Guidelines for Chemical Process Quantitative Risk Analysis,
Wiley-Interscience.
Reference Books
1. R. W. King and J. Magid, Industrial Hazards and Safety Handbook, Butterworth,
1982.
2. G. L. Wells, Safety in Process Plant Design, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1980.
3. Fawcett, H.H. and W.S. Wood, Safety and Accident Prevention in Chemical
Operations, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1982.
Advanced Energy Systems
Title Advanced Energy Systems Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
 Provide comprehensive knowledge about conventional and several advanced energy
production technology.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
 Good knowledge about different energy production systems.
Contents
Introduction: Latest topics on energy, Energy fuels for power generation, conventional
power generation technology [lectures 6].
Emerging clean energy systems: Integrated Gasification combined cycle (IGCC),
Pressurized fluidised bed combustion (PFBC, AFBC) [lectures 6].
Heavy fuel based power generation [lectures 3].
Advanced combustion systems [lectures 4].
Understanding Natural gas cycles [lectures 4].
Energy conservation in power plants [lectures 4].
Geological CO2 sequestering [lectures 3].
Natural gas cycles [lectures 4].
Materials-based Solutions to advanced Energy systems: role of advanced material,
general devices and process approaches, key materials for advanced energy systems,
structural material [lectures 8].
Textbook
1. Khartekenko, N., Khartekenko, V., 2010, Advanced Energy Systems, Taylor &
Francies, Second Edition.
Reference Books
1. Colin Tong, 2019, Introduction to Materials for Advanced Energy Systems, Springer.
2. I. Dincer and C. Zamfirescu, 2011, Sustainable Energy Systems and Applications,
Springer.
Plugin Electric Vehicles
Title Plugin Electric Vehicles Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4]
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. 1. Provide understanding of various technologies of plugin electric vehicle and hybrid electric
vehicle and their role in smart grid operation
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. 1. Design powertrain circuit topology and appropriate control scheme for electric vehicle
2. 2. Understand and design EV charging infrastructure
Contents
Introduction to EV: Recent development trends, types of electric vehicles [Lectures 2].
Powertrain: Concepts of powertrain sizing in EV and PHEV, starting, braking [Lectures 6].
Storage systems: Battery types, parameters, battery modeling, battery management
[Lectures 5].
Charging Infrastructure: Domestic charging infrastructure, public charging infrastructure,
normal charging station, occasional charging station, fast charging station, battery swapping
station, types of charging: constant voltage, constant current, pulse charging, inductive,
conductive charging [Lectures 8].
Vehicle-to-X systems: Vehicle-to-grid, vehicle-to-home, vehicle-to-building, vehicle-to-
vehicle [Lectures 8].
Hybrid Electric Vehicle: Configuration of HEV (series, parallel, series-parallel & complex),
power flow control in HEV configurations, control [Lectures 6].
Vehicle Communication: Introduction to in-vehicle communications and controller area
network [Lectures 4].
PEV integration: Impact on transmission and distribution network [Lectures 3].
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under laboratory
component: SoC estimation, control of electric vehicle drives, regenerative braking,
powertrain and vehicle dynamics, EV chargers and their control, vehicle-to-grid technology,
vehicle-to-vehicle technology, EV charging from solar PV, performance of aggregator, Use of
simulation tools (MATLAB, SIEMENS EV related softwares) to simulate different subsystems
of EV and different scenarios.
Textbook
1. 1. Husain,I., (2011), Electric and Hybrid Vehicles Design Fundamentals, 2nd Edition, CRC Press
2. 2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Emadi,A., (2011), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel Cell Vehicles
3. Fundamentals, Theory and Design, 2nd Edition, CRC Press
3. 4. Larminie,J., Lowry,J., (2003), Electric Vehicle Technology Explained, Wiley
Self Learning Material
1. 1. Jain,A.K., Electric Vehicles - Part 1, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical
Engineering, IIT Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102121/
2. 2. Kumar,P., Majhi,S., Introduction to Hybrid and Electric Vehicles, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, IIT Guwahati,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/103/108103009/
Smart Grid
Title Smart Grid Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–2 [4]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
Provide concepts and topics that are relevant to smart grid technologies to facilitate
exploring research opportunities
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
Understand the basic concepts of smart grid development and the critical technologies
that underpin such development, their basic principles, physical constraints, and
technological potentials
Contents
Smart Grid Basics: Evolution of Electric Power Grid and Smart Grid, Objectives, main features
and challenges of smart grid [Lectures 5].
Energy Resources: Centralized vs. distributed generation [Lecture 1]; renewable energy:
solar, wind, hydropower, biomass, geothermal, ocean wave; benefit, costs, and policies of
renewable energy [Lectures 5]; renewable sources integration – overcoming intermittence;
storage systems technology [Lectures 4].
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV): History of EV; PEV challenges and potential solutions [Lectures
1]; EV and electric power grid; PEV charging infrastructure, challenges and solutions
[Lectures 4]; PEV as an energy storage device and an energy source (V2G) [Lectures 2].
Demand-side management: Load profile of the power grid; market pricing [Lectures 3]; peak
shaving and valley filling; load forecasting [Lectures 4]; regulations and policies [Lectures 3].
Monitoring and Protection: Wide-area monitoring system (WAMS), SCADA and PMU [Lectures
4]; advanced metering infrastructure (AMI); smart metering [Lectures 3]; communication
infrastructure and technologies [Lectures 3].
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under laboratory
component: Characteristics of solar PV, grid integration of renewable energy sources, effect
of loads on power quality with renewable energy penetration, Inverter-based microgrid,
virtual inertia in inverter-based sources, demand side management, contribution of energy
storage systems to enhance power quality, ancillary services, smart metering, performance
of PMU
Textbook
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power
Systems, Willey-IEEE India Press
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Gay,S.E., Emadi,A., (2005), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and
Fuel Cell Vehicles: Fundamentals, Theory, and Design, CRC Press
3. Bansal,R., (2019), Power System Protection in Smart Grid Environment, CRC Press
Self-Learning Material
The Smart Grid: An Introduction,
http://www.oe.energy.gov/SmartGridIntroduction.htm, Department of Energy, 2008.
Transmission Infrastructure
Title Transmission Infrastructure Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech./Ph.D. Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite Introduction to Smart Grid
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. 1. Provide knowledge related to infrastructure in various modes of power transmission such
as underground, marine, and overhead.
2. 2. Provide knowledge related to design, installation, and maintenance of the transmission
infrastructure.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. 1. Select appropriate transmission infrastructure needed for transmission of electric power
based on various factors.
2. 2. Design, install, and maintain power transmission infrastructure.
Contents
Overhead transmission lines: Overhead line routing, aerial survey, ground survey,
overhead line foundations, soil investigation, foundation types, foundation design, support
structures, steel lattice towers, tower testing, overhead line fittings, suspension clamps, sag
adjusters, bi-metal connectors, conductor loads, lightning, surge diverters, insulator arcing
horn co-ordination, aerodynamic phenomena, transmission voltage level clearances, wooden
poles, distribution voltage clearances, overhead line maintenance, environmental
considerations [Lecture 18].
Underground cables: Types of cable, insulation and conductor materials, air cable ampacity,
underground cable ampacity, short circuit and its effect, thermal & electromechanical
stresses, cable termination and joints, pulling the cable, installing cable racks, conduits, cable
supports, cable tray and trenches, cable testing, steps for fault location, fault location
methods [Lecture 12].
Marine cables: Introduction, marine survey, cable routing, cable system design parameters,
cable design parameters, cable accessories, cable installation, cable materials & accessories,
cable joints and terminations, inspections and testing, maintenance and failure investigation
[Lecture 12].
Textbook
1. 1. Kiessling,F., Nefzger,P., Nolasco,J.F., Kaintzyk,U., (2003), Overhead Power Lines Planning
Design Construction, 4th Edition, Springer
2. 2. Ganguli,S.K., Kohli,V., (2016), Power Cable Technology, CRC Press
3. 3. Worzyk,T., (2009), Submarine Power Cables Design, Installation, Repair, Environmental
Aspects, Springer
4. 4. Bayliss,C., Hardy,B., (2012), Transmission and Distribution Electrical Engineering, 4th
Edition, Newnes publications.
Substation Infrastructure
Title Substation Infrastructure Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
Provide exposure to layout of various components of substation and design its
infrastructure.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
Develop the layout of a substation and design the substation infrastructure
Contents
Substation Layout: Substation design considerations, layouts - various bus
configurations and space requirements [Lectures 5].
Auxiliary Power: Battery and charger configurations, battery capacity, battery sizing
calculations, AC power supplies, auxiliary transformation connections, earthing
transformer [Lectures 5].
Current and Voltage Transformers: Types, design and construction constructions,
[Lectures 4].
Insulators: Insulator materials, types, design consideration, testing [Lectures 4].
Earthing and Bonding: Touch and step voltage, earthing materials, earth resistance,
earth potential rise, protective multiple earthing [Lectures 5].
Switchgear: Introduction, switches, disconnectors, contactors, introduction to
operating mechanism and arc quenching [Lectures 5].
Textbook
1. Bayliss,C., Hardy,B., (2012), Transmission and Distribution Electrical
Engineering, 4th Edition, Newnes publications
2. Rao,S., (1992), Electrical Substation Engineering and Practice Engineering &
Practice EHV-AC, HVDC AND SF6-GIS, 3rd Edition, Khanna publications
Gas Insulated Substation
Title Gas Insulated Substation Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
 Provide exposure to of gas insulated substations (GIS), its design, testing, and
diagnostics methods
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
 Design and test a gas insulated substation
Contents
Introduction: Features, economics, arrangement, and components of gas insulated
substations, comparison with air insulated substations [Lectures 4].
Introduction to SF6: physical, chemical, and electrical properties, handling,
specifications for GIS applications [Lectures 3].
Design of GIS: Ratings of components, estimation of electric stress, design aspects
of GIS components, insulation design, insulation coordination, grounding systems
[Lectures 6].
Testing: GIS testing, on-site tests, condition monitoring and diagnostic methods
[Lectures 4].
Problems and Diagnostics: Particles and their effects, SF6 gas decomposition,
characteristics of imperfections in insulation, insulation diagnostics methods, partial
discharge in GIS and its detection [Lectures 8].
Fast transient phenomena: Origin, characteristics, and effects of very fast transient
overvoltages [Lectures 3].
Textbook
1. Naidu,M.S., (2008), Gas Insulated Substations, I.K. International Publishing
House Pvt Ltd
2. Koch,H., (2014), GIS Gas Insulated Substations, IEEE Press and John Wiley &
Sons Ltd
Power System Protection
Title Power System Protection Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will provide knowledge of:
1. Various protection schemes and their applications in power industry
2. Relay coordination, instrument transformers
3. Numerical protection schemes based on signal processing techniques
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Design/propose protection schemes for various power system components
based on digital signal processing
2. Design relay coordination systems in distribution and transmission
Contents
Overview of Power System Protection: Architecture of protection system, evolution
of relays, zones of protections, concept of primary and back-up protection [Lectures
2].
Overcurrent Protection: Principles of fuse and overcurrent protection and
application to feeder and motor protection, relay coordination in distribution system
[Lectures 6].
Distance Protection: Principles of distance relaying [Lectures 2] and application to
transmission system protection, relay coordination [Lectures 5].
Differential Protection: Principles of differential protection [Lectures 2] and
application to transformer, bus bar and generator armature winding protection
[Lectures 5].
Introduction to Digital Relaying: Sampling, concept of moving window, signal
conditioning, signal processing [Lectures 4].
Instrument Transformer: Current and voltage transformers in power system
protection [Lectures 6].
Circuit breakers: Arc initiation and quenching, oil circuit breakers, air blast circuit
breakers vacuum circuit breakers, SF6 circuit breakers[Lectures 5].
Current chopping, reverse recovery voltage [Lectures 3].
Lightning arresters: Principle of operation and types [Lectures 2].
Textbook
1. Singh, L.P., (2017), Digital Protection: Protective Relaying from
Electromechanical to Microprocessor, 2nd Edition, New Age International
Publications
2. Ram,B., Vishwakarma,D.N., (2017), Power System Protection and Switchgear,
2nd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Publications.
3. Phadke,A.G., Thorp,J.S., (2009), Computer relaying for Power System, 2nd
Edition, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Publications
Self Learning Material
Soman,S.A., Power System Protection, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101039/
Cyber-Physical Security in Smart Grid
Title Cyber-Physical Security in Smart Grid Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
Provide exposure to the various layers of smart grid architecture and security issues
related to vital components of smart grid
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
Understand various cyber layers of smart grid and the threats to the physical
components, and design a secure system
Contents
Introduction: Physical components of a grid, communication in smart grid, self-
monitoring, self-healing, vulnerabilities of smart grid, cyber-physical security (5 lectures)
Security Architecture of Smart Grids: Security architecture of smart Grid and its layers,
typical SCADA network levels, conceptual control system with layering, robust and
resilient control, secure network routing, management of information security, user
patching [Lectures 6].
Advanced Metering Infrastructure and Security Issues: Smart meters, customer gateway,
AMI communication network, AMI head-end, AMI security threats, interactions, malicious
code planted in the system, denial of service, insider attacks, unauthorized access
[Lectures 4].
SCADA System Security: Introduction to SCADA, Security Issues in SCADA, Public
Information Availability, Platform Vulnerabilities, Network Configuration Vulnerabilities,
Network Perimeter Vulnerabilities, DNP3 Threats [Lectures 5].
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV) Security Issues: Introduction to PEV Security, Privacy of
movement, Secure payment, Critical Infrastructure and Physical Security,
Communication issues in PEVs [Lectures 4].
Smart Grid Domain Security: IEEE standards for smart grid security, IEEE 802.11, IEEE
802.15.4, IEEE 802.16, Bluetooth and BLE/BT5.0, ZigBee, Z-Wave, Gateway Component,
FMEA, STAMP, HAZOP, Smart Grid Information Security (SGIS), SGIS Risk Impact Level
(SGIS-RIL) [Lectures 6].
Blockchain for Smart Grid: Blockchain: Smart contract, applications of blockchain
technology to energy; Energy trading: Transition towards blockchain-based electricity
trading market, Internet of Energy (IoE); Distributed Energy Resources: Decentralized
operation of interdependent power and energy networks based on Blockchain and
security, Electric vehicles: Blockchain for decentralized optimization of energy sources:
EV charging coordination via blockchain-based charging power quota trading, Microgrid:
microgrid monitoring and control using blockchain [Lectures 12].
Textbook
 Hossain,E., Han,Z., Poor,H.V., (2012), Smart Grid Communications and Networking,
Cambridge University Press
 Berger,L.T., Iniewski,K., (2012), SMART GRID Applications, Communications, and
Security, John Wiley and Sons Publications
 Shafie-khan,M., (2020), Blockchain-based Smart Grids, Academic Press
Energy Harvesting
Title Energy Harvesting Number PHL6XX0
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide the student with an extended knowledge of the basic principles and recent
advances in Energy harvesting technologies for low-power applications including self-
powered or autonomous systems.
2. Provide the students with the role of materials in energy harvesting technologies with a
focus on miniaturized and microfabricated devices.
Learning Outcomes
The students will:
1. Develop an understanding of basic principle, concept, working mechanism and applications
of various energy harvesting devices.
2. Develop an understanding to design new energy harvesting systems.
Contents
Micro Photovoltaic Module Energy Harvesting: p-n Junction and Crystalline Si Solar
Cells, Amorphous Silicon Solar Cell, CIGS and CdTe Solar Cell Development, Polymer Solar
Cell, Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSC), Perovskite Solar Cells, Monolithically Integration of
Solar Cells with IC, Low-Power Micro Photovoltaic Systems, Maximum Power Point Tracking
[Lecture 12].
Mechanical Energy Harvesting: Energy Harvesting from Macro to Micro to Nano,
Piezoelectric MEMS Energy Harvesters, Nano-Piezoelectric Generator, Piezoelectric Cantilever
Generator, Piezoelectric Transducers. New-generation Triboelectric Nanogenerators [Lecture
8].
Thermal Energy Harvesting: Overview of Nanoscale Heat Conduction and the Seebeck
Effect, Thermoelectric energy harvesting and Power Generation, Thermoelectric figures of
merit, Novel nanostructured Thermoelectric materials and devices, Thermal energy
harvesting using pyroelectric materials, Thermodynamic cycles for Pyroelectric energy
harvesting, Nanostructured and micro-scale materials and devices [Lecture 12].
Energy Storage: Li-ion Batteries, Li-polymer Batteries, Micro-batteries, Thin film batteries
for Energy Storage, Materials for high-energy density 2D and 3D batteries. Supercapacitors:
Electrolyte and Electrode materials, Fundamentals, Challenges and Applications [Lecture 10].
Textbooks
1. Briand, D., Yeatman, E., Roundy, S., Micro Energy Harvesting Wiley, 2015.
2. Shashank, P., Inman, D. J., Energy Harvesting Technologies, Springer, 2009.
Self-Learning Material
1. Elvin, N., Erturk, A., Advances in Energy Harvesting Methods, Springer, 2013.
2. Jaffe, R., and Taylor, W., Physics of Energy, MIT open course,
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-21-the-physics-of-energy-fall-2009/
3.
Preparatory Course Material
4. Pal, K., Selection of Nanomaterials for Energy harvesting and Energy Storage
Applications, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107283/
Energy Economics and Policy
Title Energy Economics and
Policy
Number
Department L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-0 [1]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. Enable students to learn advanced concepts of stress analysis
2. Apply concepts to analysis of mechanical systems such as rotating disks, thick
cylinders etc.
Learning Outcomes
1. Develop Ability to solve advanced stress analysis problems using analytical and
numerical methods
2. Ability to formulate and solve 3D problems in stress analysis
Contents
Energy as economic resources: classification of energy resources; measurement of
energy; energy accounting [Lectures 7].
Energy demand: basic concepts in economics; descriptive analysis of energy demand;
decomposition analysis and parametric approach; demand side management; load
management [Lectures 7].
Text Books
1. Alessandro Rubino Alessandro Sapio Massimo La Scala Michelle Hallack (2020)
Handbook of Energy Economics and Policy (1st Ed). Elsevier Academic Press. ISBN:
9780128147122.
Online course Material
1. “Energy Economics and policy” by Prof. Shyamasree Dasgupta on NTPEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106161/
Wind turbine and field design
Title Wind turbine and field design Number CIVIL7XX0
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To provide high-level insight into the technical and engineering aspects of wind energy.
2. To develop understanding of advanced principles of aerodynamics and structural
mechanics used in design of wind turbine.
Learning Outcomes
The students will have understanding of:
1. Wind turbine dynamic system behavior with integrated components and their control for
a given application.
2. Computing performance characteristics of the main components of wind turbine.
3. Wind turbine blade aerodynamics to predict force components and moments experienced
by modern wind turbines.
Contents
Wind power: Introduction to wind power: Maximum rated power, power coefficient, average
annual power from a wind turbine, wind speed relationships based on the Beaufort scale, wind
turbine protection from the wind, total energy from the wind, energy content, geographical
resource distribution, influence of terrain, measurement methods and statistical analysis
[Lectures 10].
Aerodynamics: Fluid flow concept, 2-D Aerodynamics, 3-D aerodynamics [Lectures 12].
Turbines: Introduction and Evolution of wind turbines, classification and status and basic
anatomy of wind turbines, design of turbine rotor blades, HAWTs, VAWTs, Betz and Glaurets
turbine theories and the BEM method, Horizontal and vertical axis wind turbines (HAWTs and
VAWTs), blades, choice of materials and adaptation to different climates, aeroelasticity and
Wind turbine modelling [Lectures 10].
Controls: Control mechanisms, control targets, control strategies (pitch and stall regulation)
[Lectures 10].
Textbook
1. J. F. Maxwell, J. G. McGowan, and A. L. Rogers, Wind Energy Explained – Theory,
Design, and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, 2010, ISBN: 978-0-47001500-1.
2. Martin O. L. Hansen, Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines, Second edition, Earthscan, UK,
2008.
Offshore Wind Energy Harvesting
Title Offshore Wind Energy Harvesting Number CIVIL7XX0
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To highlight the complexities of an offshore wind farms and differences with their
onshore counterpart.
2. To introduce the principles of an offshore wind farm design.
3. To introduce principles of management and economics of a wind farm
Learning Outcomes
The students will have understanding of:
1. Aerodynamic, hydrodynamic, and structural loads on offshore wind structures.
2. Design of fixed and floating platforms for wind turbines.
3. Principles of designs of a wind firm, its control, and maintenance.
4. Details of the life-cycle cost and economic feasibility study of an offshore wind farm.
Contents
The offshore environment: Atmospheric wind flow and its characteristic in the boundary
layer, ocean winds, wave theories, wind and wave forces on offshore structures [Lectures 7].
Fixed and floating offshore platforms, their analysis, and design: Fixed and floating
offshore platforms, mooring lines-their dynamic analysis, wind forces on offshore structures,
Design provisions in API and DNV codes, Fixed and floating offshore wind turbines-their
dynamic analysis, coupled and uncoupled analysis, Fatigue consideration [Lectures 8].
Floating offshore wind turbines (FOWT): OWT drivetrain and gearbox simulation;
Dynamic behaviour of bearings on offshore wind turbine gearbox: Experimental
characterization of OWT gearbox in operation [Lectures 7].
Offshore wind turbine field design: Spatiotemporal wind resource assessment;
Bathymetry and other sea constraints; Strategic planning; Offshore wind farm design; Large
eddy simulation of wind farm aerodynamics [Lectures 7].
Operation and Maintenance Modelling: Classification of models; State-of-the-art in
modelling; Decision support tools: vessel-fleet optimization models, cost-benefit evaluation
of remote inspection [Lectures 7].
Life-cycle cost and economic feasibility of a floating offshore wind farm: Life-cycle
cost calculation: Economic Map Tools and Restrictions Maps Tools; Life-cycle definition,
breakdown structure of processes, and calculation of costs; CAPEX and OPEX; Net Present
Value (NPV); Internal Rate of Return (IRR); Discounted Pay-Back Period (DPBP); Levelized
Cost of Energy (LCOE); Cost of Power Ratio [Lectures 7].
Suggested Textbooks:
1. Olimpo Anaya-Lara, John O. Tande, Kjetil Uhlen, Karl Merz (2018) Offshore Wind
Energy Technology. Wiley. ISBN 9781119097785.
2. Joao Cruz, Mairead Atcheson (2016). Floating offshore wind energy (1st Ed). Springer.
ISBN 978-3-319-29398-1.
3. Wiesław Ostachowicz, Malcolm McGugan, Jens-Uwe Schroder-Hinrichs, Marcin Luczak.
MARE-WINT. New Materials and Reliability in Offshore Wind Turbine Technology.
Springer Nature. ISBN 978-3-319-39034-9.
4. Laura Castro-Santos, Vincente Diaz-Casas (2016) Floating Offshore Wind Farms.
Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-27972-5.
5. S. K. Chakrabarti (2021). Dynamics of floating offshore structures. World Scientific.
ISBN: 9789814280563
Offshore Tidal Energy Harvesting
Title Offshore Tidal Energy Harvesting Number CIVIL7XX0
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. Holistic introduction of different aspects of a tidal energy system.
2. Introduction of design principles and size optimization.
3. Basics of control and reliability assessment of a tidal system.
Learning Outcomes
1. Knowledge of prefeasibility assessment models.
2. Knowledge of optimization techniques to increase efficiency of a tidal energy system.
3. Different control system of a tidal current turbine.
4. Knowledge of different failure models for reliability assessment.
Content
Introduction of tidal energy: Principles and components of tidal power plants; Available
technologies and concepts; Estimation of energy calculation; Tidal dynamics and structures
of tidal currents [Lectures 7].
Prefeasibility analysis: Analysis of location; Physical boundaries of assessment; Static v/s
transect field survey; Location assessment: Farm method and Flux method [Lectures 7].
Optimum sizing and modelling of tidal energy system: Modelling of tidal energy
conversion systems; Numerical solution of tidal energy systems; Modelling of a tidal current
turbine; Tidal energy facility size [Lectures 7].
Control system: Automatic control system; Control strategies of ocean wave conversion
systems; Reactive power control of tidal turbine; Dynamic control of tidal current turbine;
Power system stability analysis [Lectures 7].
Reliability assessment: The failure distribution model; Constant failure rate model; Time
dependent failure model; Assessment of tidal energy system by fault tree analysis [Lectures
7].
Advances in tidal energy systems: Tidal energy system scenario: India and World;
Environmental assessment; Tidal harmonic analysis; Assessment of tidal energy system:
Optimization technique and Game theory; Economic analysis [Lectures 7].
Textbook
1. Vikas Khare, Cheshta Khare , Savita Nema, Prashant Baredar (2019). Tidal energy
systems. Elsevier. ISBN: 978-0-12-814881-5.
2. S. K. Chakrabarti (2021). Dynamics of floating offshore structures. World Scientific.
ISBN: 9789814280563
Power Plant Engineering
Title Power Plant Engineering Number MEL7XX0
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite B.Tech
Objectives
This course is designed-
1. to introduce different aspects of power plant engineering such as power plant layout,
operation and safety principles
2. to provide knowledge of the working principle of conversion of different energy
resources into electrical power generation.
Learning Outcomes
The students will acquire,
1. ability to select an appropriate type of power plant for given requirements under
different situations
2. skills for optimization of energy efficiency of power plants with respect to available
resources and energy requirements.
3. ability to analyze the working and layout of power plants and the various components
comprising the plant.
Content:
Introduction to power plant engineering: Sources of energy, National and International
status on power generation [Lectures 2].
Thermal Power Plant: Plant layout, Thermal power plant equipment, Types of boilers, the
performance of boilers, supercritical steam generator, the performance of condensers, types
of steam turbines, draught system [Lectures 8].
Gas Turbine Power Plant: Classification and construction layout, Principles of closed and
open cycle gas turbines [Lectures 4].
Combined cycle power plants: Load type and calculation, Load variation, Use of internal
combustion engine plant, Plant layout and design calculation, combined cycle efficiency
[Lectures 5].
Nuclear power plant: Principles of nuclear energy, Elements of nuclear power plants, Types
of nuclear fuel, nuclear reactor, Boiling Water Reactor, Pressurised Water Reactor,
Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor, Fast breeder reactors, Next generation nuclear plant
[Lectures 6].
Hydroelectric power plant: Plant layout, water turbine, plant operation, water storage and
flow duration, hydrographs, Low, medium and high head plants, pumped storage plants,
Penstock, water hammer, surge tanks, gates and valves, power house [Lectures 6].
Site selection: Selection of for power station, load estimation, load duration curve, load
factor, capacity factor, use factor, diversity factor, demand factor, Effect of variable load on
power plant, selection of the number and size of units [Lectures 4].
Economics and Environmental Considerations: Capital cost, Cost of energy production,
Operational cost of power plants, tariffs for electrical energy, Environmental impact, different
types of pollution, fuel availability [Lectures 3].
Electrical components of power plants: generator, transformer, speed governing
systems, generator excitation systems, switchyard [Lectures 4].
Laboratory Classes [12-13 Classes]
Steam Power Plant: Start-up, Operation and maintenance, Shut down of Steam Power Plant,
Control and monitoring.
Boilers: Efficiency of a steam generator, Analysis of exhaust gas from boiler, Determination
of the heat flux density and the overall heat transfer coefficient in boilers.
Steam Turbine: Demonstration of the function of a steam turbine, Operating Characteristics
of Steam turbine.
Cooling tower: Determination of cooling capacity, Operating Characteristics of Cooling tower
Gas Turbine: Determination of specific fuel consumption, Determination of Shaft power and
System efficiency.
Reference Books
1. M. M. Ei-Wakil, Power Plant Technology, Tata McGraw-Hill.
2. P. K. Nag, Power Plant Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill.
3. F. T. Morse, Power Plant Engineering, D. Van Nostran, New York.
Learning Material
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107291/
Energy Storage
Title Energy Storage Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech./Ph.D. Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite Introduction to Smart Grid
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. 1. Provide understanding of various types of energy storage elements, their principle,
characteristics, and applications
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. 1. Design suitable energy storage technology as per demand, location, cost and other
parameters.
Contents
Fractal - 1
Energy Storage Systems: Introduction of energy storage systems, Energy Demand,
Energy Storage Methods and comparison [Lectures 4].
Thermal energy storage systems: Basic Principle, Thermal energy storage methods,
Sensible heat storage [Lectures 5].
Latent heat storage, phase-change materials, operational aspects, Cold thermal energy
storage, Seasonal thermal energy storage [Lectures 5].
Fractal - 2
Mechanical energy storage systems: Introduction, Flywheel energy storage-design and
components [Lectures 4].
Pumped hydropower storage [Lectures 3].
Compressed-air energy storage- Specifications of components, classification [Lectures 4].
Applications, Technical characteristics in terms of power rating and discharge time, storage
duration, energy efficiency, energy density, cycle life, lifetime, capital cost, etc. [Lectures
3].
Fractal - 3
Electrochemical/chemical energy storage: Introduction, rechargeable batteries and their
electrochemistry, types of batteries - integration into electrical grids, performance,
characteristics, off-grid systems - sizing - small scale battery storage systems, recycling
technologies, battery testing, battery management, regulations and safety aspects of high
voltage batteries, hydrogen energy storage Hydrogen economy, fuel cell, safety [Lectures
11].
Electrical energy storage: Superconducting magnetic energy storage systems - principles,
materials, performance, and characteristics, super capacitors [Lectures 3].
Laboratory Classes [12-13 Classes] The experiments for the course include:
Measurement of internal resistance, cold-cranking amps, capacity, state of health, charging
efficiency; Charging and discharging characteristics; Testing of stater-batteries; Self-
discharge and storage; Effect of temperature on – voltage, capacity, internal resistance, self-
discharge, life; Centralized, distributed, hybrid cell balancing; Design and simulation of charge
controllers for battery; Simulation of battery management system; Simulation of different
models using different software like Siemens Simcenter battery; design studio, Matlab.
Textbook
1. Cabeza,L.F., (2015), Advances in Thermal Energy Storage Systems: Methods and
Applications, Woodhead Publishing
2. Kalaiselvam,S., Parameshwaram R., (2014), Thermal Energy Storage for Sustainability-
Systems Design, Assessment and Applications, Academic Press
3. Alami,A.H., (2020), Mechanical Energy Storage for Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Resources, Springer
4. Huggins,R.A., (2014), Energy Storage-Fundamentals, Materials and Applications, 2nd edition,
Springer
Biomass Energy Conversion
Title Biomass Energy Conversion Course BBXX
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Illustrate the principles and applications of bio-energy harnessing systems ranging
from conventional processes to the latest developments in the area.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Have an understanding of the existing and emerging biomass to energy technologies.
2. Utilize the knowledge of bioenergy systems while integrating bioenergy with other
renewable energy systems.
3. Suggest potential solutions for energy needs by incorporating bioenergy technology.
Contents
Bioenergy context: Introduction, Biofuels and biopower; automobile and biofuels,
feedstocks (harvested and residual), Emissions from biofuels [Lecture 6].
Thermochemical biomass conversion: Chemical composition, Biomass types and
characteristics, Biomass pre-treatment and processing, Combustion, Gasification, Pyrolysis,
Catalytic conversion of biomass to liquid biofuels, Life cycle analysis [Lecture 14].
Biochemical biomass conversion: Anaerobic fermentation technology: Biogas
production, process microbiology, different types of bioreactors, basic process kinetics,
Various types of biofuels,1st and 2nd generation biofuels, Algal Biofuels, ASTM standards for
biofuels, Engineered microbes for biofuel [Lecture 10].
Bioelectrochemical systems: Introduction to Microbial Fuel cells (MFC), Nernst equation
and electrochemical potential difference, the redox reactions, calculating and measuring
potentials, The exoelectrogenic microbes, MFC components, Applications of MFC, Bio
electrochemical system for Hydrogen production, Artificial photosynthesis [Lecture 12].
Lab:
Biomass acid treatment process and estimation of reducing sugars, performing ethanol
fermentation and determine ethanol yield and productivity, performing butanol fermentation,
setting up a biogas production process, Screening cellulose producers from natural
environments, enzyme activity assays for lignocellulosic waste, performing acid
catalysed/base catalysed biodiesel production-comparison of process kinetics, determine
biodiesel yield with sequential base/acid treatment for free fatty acid rich microbial oil, Setting
up Microbial fuel cells.
Textbooks
1. German Solar Energy Society, Ecofys, (2006) Planning and installing bioenergy
systems: A guide for installers, architects and engineers, Earthscan,
2. Vertes, A. A., Qureshi, A., Yukawa, H., Blaschek, H.P.,(2010) Biomass to Biofuels,
Wiley.
3. H. S. Mukunda, Understanding Clean Energy and Fuels from Biomass, Wiley India
Pvt. Ltd., 2011.
Reference Books
1. Stanier, R. Y., (2009) General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co.
2. Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R.,(2001) Microbiology, Tata McGraw - Hill
Education
Online course material
Michelle O'Malley, Fueling Sustainability: Engineering Microbial Systems for Biofuel
Production, Spring 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA
Hydrogen and Methanol Economy
Title Hydrogen and Methanol Economy Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for MTech, MTech-PhD, PhD Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite none
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production, storage, their
Utility and infrastructure development.
2. Impart knowledge about the economic and environmental viewpoint of using Hydrogen
and Methanol as fuel sources.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. Proper knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production and related issues.
2. Economic view point of Hydrogen and Methanol as fuel and the related challenges &
opportunities.
Contents
Hydrogen and methanol as fuels: General aspects, Prelude to energy systems, Hydrogen
and Methanol as energy sources, Future energy supply, Economy and Environment,
Sustainability [Lectures 6].
Hydrogen Production Processes: Properties, production, storage, utilization and safely,
Infrastructure requirement, Hydrogen as a transportation fuel, Hydrogen based fuel cell
[Lectures 12].
Methanol Production Processes: Properties, production, storage, transportation and
safely, Infrastructure Requirement, Methanol as fuel and energy carrier, Methanol as
automobile, marine and aviation fuel [Lectures 14].
Challenges and opportunities: Indian and global perspectives, Domestic and
transportation application, Affordable Technology development, Policy [Lectures 6].
Case studies: Comparative study with other energy sources [Lectures 4].
Textbook
1. G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, G. K. S. Prakash,(2006), Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol
Economy, Wiley‐VCH, Weinheim, Germany.
2. Ball M. and Wietschel M.,(2009) The Hydrogen Economy Opportunities and Challenges,
Cambridge University Press.
Reference Books
1. A. Scipioni, A. Manzardo, J. Ren, (2017) Hydrogen Economy: Supply Chain, Life Cycle
Analysis and Energy Transition for Sustainability, Academic Press.
2. M. Bertau, H. Offermanns, L. Plass, F. Schmidt, H. Wernicke,(2014) Methanol: The Basic
Chemical and Energy Feedstock of the Future, Springer; 2014
Hydropower
Title Hydropower Number ME7XX0
Department Mechanical Engineering, electrical
Engineering, Civil & Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives:
The Instructor will:
1. Describe the role of the hydropower and working principles of small- and large-scale
hydropower plants.
2. Provide overview of the practical design of hydropower structures including
mechanical and electrical equipment.
3. Introduce students to geotechnical, mechanical, and electrical engineering aspects
of conventional large dams.
Learning Outcomes:
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Formulate and analyze technical solutions for design, and operation of hydropower
plants.
2. Analyze a technical problems connected to the hydroelectric power industry.
3. Compare the design of dams, mechanical, electric and electronic equipment.
4. Implement design details of embankment dam, components of face rockfill dams
and concrete gravity dam, and basis of dam foundation design.
Fractal 1 (ME)
Introduction: Hydropower resource, potential and market, Hydropower sites, Types of
hydropower plants. (Lectures: 2)
Large hydropower: Run-of-River Hydropower, Dams and Barrages, Dam types
(Lectures: 3)
Hydropower turbines, Classification and working principles, Impulse and reaction
turbines; Propeller and Kaplan Turbines, Deriaz turbine. (Lectures: 5)
Tidal power: Tidal barrage power plant, operation and design, Tidal lagoons, Barrage
construction techniques, Turbine speed regulation. (Lectures: 4)
Fractal 2 (EE)
Hydropower Generators: Generator poles and rotational speed, orientation, types
(Lectures: 2)
Small Hydropower: Small, mini, and micro hydropower plant, generators for small hydro
power plants (Lectures: 3)
Electronic Control of Hydropower: Phase angle control, relay switched on loads, Mark-
Space ratio controller (Lectures: 3)
Pumped Storage Hydropower: Pumped storage hydropower plant, turbines, motors
(Lectures: 3)
Hydropower House: Classification, equipment, accessories, layout, components, sizing
(Lectures: 3)
Fractal 2 (CIE)
Site investigation techniques: Geological environments: rocks and soils; Geological,
geotechnical, and geophysical investigation; Trenching and drilling (Lectures: 2)
Design of embankment dams: freeboard; Slope protection; Embankment crest details;
Dimensioning and tolerances; Conduits through embankments; Flood control
structures; Seismic stability analysis of embankments; Liquefaction of dam
embankments and foundations. (Lectures: 4)
Concrete face rockfill dams and Concrete gravity dams: Selection of dam types; Rockfill
zones; Concrete face; Construction aspects; Settlements, and displacements of the face
slab, and joints; Leakage; Strength and compressibility of rock foundations; Strength
of concrete in the dam; Strength of the concrete-rock contact; Silt and ice load
(Lectures: 4)
Foundation preparation: General foundation preparation for embankment dams; Cutoff
foundation for embankment dams; Width and batter slopes; Slope modification;
Foundation preparation for concrete gravity dams. (Lectures: 4)
Textbook
1. Breeze,P., (2018), Hydropower, Academic Press
2. Pandey,B., Karki,A., (2017), Hydroelectric Energy, Renewable Energy and the
Environment, CRC Press
3. Robin Fell, Patrick MacGregor, David Stapledon, Graeme Bell (2005) Geotechnical
Engineering of Dams. A. A. Balkema publishers. ISBN 04 1536 440 x.
Fuel Cell Technology
Title Fuel Cell Technology Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about the fuel cell technology.
2. Discuss the fundamentals of deferent fuel cells.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. Comprehensive knowledge about fuel cell technology.
2. The ability to design different types of cells.
Contents
Basics of Cell Technology: Principles of fuel cells, Fuel cells systems and staking,
applications, performance study, electrochemistry and thermodynamics of fuel cells.
[Lectures 6].
Fuel cell kinetics: electrode kinetics, catalysis in fuel cells, activation energy, reaction
equilibrium, exchange currents and electrocatalysis, design principles of catalyst-
electrode, Sabatier principle [Lectures: 6].
Charge and mass transport: resistance and voltage loss, electrical driving force, fuel cell
electrolytes, diffusive and conductive transport, convective transport. [Lectures: 6]
Modelling and characterization: Theory and governing equations, basic fuel cell model,
1D model, CFD application in modelling, characterization techniques of fuel cells,
physical and chemical methods [Lectures 6].
Proton-exchange membrane (PEM) Fuel Cell: Cell components, material properties and
processes; membrane layer, current collector and gas delivery, catalyst action, design
issues, high temperature and reverse operation, degradation and lifetime. [Lectures: 9]
Other Fuel cells: Solid Oxide Fuel Cell(SOFC), Phosphoric acid fuel cell (PAFC), Alkaline
fuel cell (AFC), Solid acid fuel cell (SAFC), Molten-carbonate fuel cell (MCFC), Microbial
fuel cell, etc., Environmental impact of fuel cells, fuel cell vehicles, building-integrated
fuel cells. [Lectures 9].
Textbook
1. Andrew L. Dicks, David A. J. Rand, 2018, Fuel Cell Systems Explained, Willey, Third
Edition.
2. Ryan O'Hayre, Suk-Won Cha, Whitney Colella, Fritz B. Prinz, 2005, Fuel Cell
Fundamentals, Willey, Third Edition.
Reference Books
1. Bent Sorensen, 2012, Hydrogen and Fuel Cells: Emerging Technologies and
Applications, Elsevier, Second Edition.
2. Frano Barbir, 2013, PEM Fuel Cells: Theory and Practice, Elsevier Inc., Second
Edition.
3. Ryan O'Hayre, Suk-Won Cha, Whitney Colella, Fritz B. Prinz, 2009, Fuel Cell
Fundamentals, Wiley, Second Edition.
Electrochemical Conversion and Storage
Title Electrochemical Conversion and Storage Number CH7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Impart the knowledge of electrochemical engineering, Working principle, materials and
characterization of electrochemical conversion for energy production.
2. Introduce the mechanism to store energy.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. Comprehensive knowledge about electrochemical process.
2. Advanced knowledge about energy production via electrochemical process and store
it efficiently.
Contents
Introduction: basics of electrochemical Conversions and Storage, devices and Principles,
over view of fuel cells, Photo-electrochemical conversion and cells. [Lectures: 5]
Batteries for energy storage: primary and secondary batteries, limitations of battery
performance, Lead Acid Battery, Nickel-Metal Hydride (Ni-MH) Rechargeable Batteries,
Lithium-Ion Rechargeable Batteries, Liquid- Redox Rechargeable Batteries. [Lectures: 10]
Electrochemical supercapacitor: introduction to supercapacitor, types and structures,
Transport Properties, electric double-layer capacitor, physical/elcrochemical processes in
supercapacitors, diffuse layer, pseudocapacitor. [Lectures: 11]
Electrodialysis: introduction to electrodialysis and reverse electrodialysis, control
parameters, effect of flow structure. [Lectures: 4]
Electrochemical Hydrogen Production: Introduction to electrolysis, electrolysers and
hydrogen production, PEM water electrolysers, electrochemical reforming of alcohol,
perspectives of hydrogen electroproduction techniques. [Lectures: 12]
Textbooks
1. Vladimir S. Bagotsky, Alexander M. Skundin, Yurij M. Volfkovich, 2015,
Electrochemical Power Sources: Batteries, Fuel Cells, and Supercapacitors, Wiley.
2. Jiujun Zhang, Lei Zhang, Hansan Liu, Andy Sun, Ru-Shi Liu, 2011, Electrochemical
Technologies for Energy Storage and Conversion, Wiley-VCH, First Edition.
3. Allen J. Bard, Larry R. Faulkner, 2001, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and
Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Second Edition.
Reference Books
1. Keith Scott, 2020, Electrochemical Methods for Hydrogen Production, RSC, UK.
2. Stanley W. Angrist, 1982, Direct Energy Conversion , Allyn and Bacon Inc.
Selected Topics in Distributed Generations
Title Selected Topics in Distributed Generations Number EE7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide salient concepts of DG operation and control in both grid connected and
autonomous modes
2. Provide exposure to the challenges related to stability, grid integration, and
ancillary services in distributed generation
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Develop control schemes for distributed generators to operate in grid connected
and autonomous mode
2. Understand various challenges and propose solutions related to stability, grid
integration and ancillary services in distributed generation
Contents
Distributed generation: Introduction, DG types, concept of inertia and frequency
response, flexibility issues, ramping issues (Lectures: 3)
Control of distributed generation: Modelling and control of distributed energy
sources such as solar PV, wind energy, diesel generator (Lectures: 10)
Microgrids: Concept of microgrid, microgrid benefits, typical structures and
configurations of various microgrids (Lectures: 3), control of converters in DC and
AC microgrids (Lectures: 4), active and reactive power control, voltage and
frequency control of inverter-based sources (Lectures: 3), virtual synchronous
generators (Lectures: 2)
Stability: Stability issues with weak grid integration and in microgrid operation
(Lectures: 4)
Other challenges in grid integration: Power quality requirements, DG support under
abnormal grid conditions (Lectures: 3), issues related to islanding and reverse
power flow, network congestion (Lectures: 5), and protection (Lectures: 2)
Ancillary services: Ancillary services with DGs, control for ancillary services, virtual
power plants (Lectures: 3)
Textbook
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the
Power Systems, Willey-IEEE India Press
2. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
3. Bevrani,H., Francois,B., Ise,T., (2017), Microgrid Dynamics and Control, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Materials for Electrochemical Energy Conversion and Storage
Title Materials for Electrochemical Energy
Conversion and Storage
Number
Department Physics and Metallurgical & Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 [2]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite -
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide the student with an extended knowledge of the basic principles and recent
advances in Energy Storage materials and associated technologies for consumer
electronics to high-power applications.
2. Provide the students with the role of materials in energy storage technologies.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain knowledge on:
1. Different modes of energy conversion and storage with respect to scale, cost, energy
and power density
2. Structure processing property performance relationship of the energy materials
developed over time.
Contents
Introduction: Overview of electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices, Basic
terminology, Classification, Applications. (Offered by Physics) (Lectures: 2)
Batteries: Introduction to Batteries, primary and secondary batteries, Solid-state and liquid
electrolyte batteries, Lead acid batteries, Nickel Cadmium Batteries, Li-ion and Li-Polymer
batteries, Intercalation and Conversion Materials, Battery Capacity and Life, Micro-
batteries, Thin film batteries, Materials for high-energy density 2D and 3D batteries
(Offered by Physics) (Lectures 12)
Fuel cells: Principle and types, performance characteristics and efficiency of fuel cell, Proton
exchange fuel cells, Solid oxide fuel cells, Types of solid oxide fuel cells: High and
intermediate temperature, Single chamber solid oxide fuel cells. Polymer electrolyte fuel
cells, Acid/alkaline fuel cells, phosphoric acid fuel cell, molten carbonate fuel cell, fuel cell
stack, hydrogen storage (Offered by MT) (Lectures: 10)
Supercapacitors: Difference between Capacitor and Supercapacitor, Electrolyte and
Electrode materials, electric double layer capacitors, Challenges and Applications (Offered
by MT) (lectures: 4)
Textbook
Cheong K. Y., Impellizzeri G and Fraga M. A. (2018) Emerging Materials for Energy
Conversion and Storage, 1st Edition, Elsevier
Reference Book
Rosen M. A. (2012) Energy Storage, Nova
Online Course Materials
1. Prof. Bazant M., MITopencourseware: Electrochemical Energy Systems, MIT Course
Number 10.626 / 10.426, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemical-engineering/10-626-
electrochemical-energy-systems-spring-2014/
2. Prof. Pal K., Selection Of Nanomaterials For Energy Harvesting And Storage Application,
NPTEL Course Material, Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/107/112107283/
Solar Energy and Applications
Title Solar Energy and Applications Number MEL7XX0
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th
[C]
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite B.Tech Degree
Objectives
This course has objectives-
1. to familiarize students with the potential of solar energy to meet the growing energy
demands of society in a sustainable way,
2. to elaborate students, the concepts of solar energy applications in architecture and
infrastructure, and
3. to illustrate solar technologies of producing power and cooling/heating in buildings.
Learning Outcomes
The students will acquire-
1. understanding of availability and potential of solar energy.
2. knowledge of various means of solar energy utilization technologies and their
applications.
3. enable students to model, design and evaluate solar energy systems and their
applications from the fundamental principles and methods.
Content:
Solar Radiation: Introduction to Solar Radiation, distribution, measurement and data, Sun
motion, Introduction to Detectors, Radiation on Sloped Surfaces, Principle of conversion of
solar radiation into heat, Thermal comfort, Introduction to Concentrated Solar Power (CSP)
Technologies. [Lectures 14]
Photovoltaics: Photovoltaic (PV) Effect, PV cells, The electrical model of PV cells, effect of
shading, converters for grid integration of solar PV: DC-DC boost converter and inverter,
control of boost converter and inverter, MPPT techniques and implementation. Mounting of
solar panels, design and analysis of solar trees. [Lectures 14]
Energy Efficient Buildings: Building orientation and design, passive heating and cooling
concepts, thumb rules, heat transfer in buildings: Thermal modeling of passive concepts,
Evaporative cooling, Energy efficient windows and daylighting, Earth air tunnel and heat
exchanger, Zero energy building concept and rating systems, Energy conservation building
codes, Software for Building Simulation, Automation and Energy Management of Buildings.
[Lectures 14]
Reference Books
1. Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes. John A. Duffie, William A. Beckman. John,
Fourth Edition, Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2013.
2. G.N.Tiwari, Solar Energy. CRC Press, 2002.
3. M.S. Sodha, N.K. Bansal, P.K. Bansal, A. Kumar, and M.A.S.Malik, Solar Passive
Building, Science and Design, Pergamon Press, 1986.
4. Renewable Energy Resources: Basic Principles and Applications. G. N. Tiwari, M K.
Ghosal, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, 2004.
Learning Material
1. Solar Energy Technology https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105051/
2. Solar Photovoltaics Fundamentals, Technology And Applications
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115/107/115107116/
Artificial Intelligence-I
Title Artificial Intelligence – 1 Number CS 7XX0
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives: The Instructor will:
Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI, with some of
them being covered in depth
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to:
Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used
Contents
Introduction [Lecture 1].
Propositional logic [Lectures 8].
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A*
search, heuristic functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm,
Alpha-beta pruning) [Lectures 10].
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution [Lectures 6].
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar [Lectures
3].
Constraint satisfaction problems [Lectures 4].
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning [Lectures 4].
Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer
theory, Fuzzy logic [Lectures 6].
Textbook
Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd
Edition, Prentice Hall.
Reference books:
Research literature
Self-Learning Materials
1. Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,
http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F
2. NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/