1
Indian Institute of Technology
Jodhpur
PG Course Booklet
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
July 2019
2
Master of Science (MSc) Program
in
Mathematics
3
(1) Introduction:
The classical mathematics provides foundations for analysis of key principles behind
modern and emergent technologies, modern mathematics coupled with computational
capabilities is opening new avenues for further explorations. M.Sc. (Mathematics)
Program at IIT Jodhpur aims at tapping these opportunities by developing workforce
specialized in mathematics needed for developing key technologies. The proposed four
semester program strives to provide balance between analysis and application of
Mathematics. The compulsory courses provide the basic understanding and foundation of
mathematics enhancing analytic capabilities of the students. Students can further
explore their area of interest with program and open elective courses. The project
component spread over last two semesters provides research exposure to the students
and provides an opportunity to apply their mathematical skills to solve real-life
problems. Students are encouraged to undertake research Summer Internships in
Institute of repute, Industry and R&D organizations.
(2) Objectives of the Program:
M.Sc. program in Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur is offered with the objective of tapping
opportunities for nurturing motivated students in the frontline areas and well trained
workforce for Academia and Industry. The Program also strives to provide a vibrant
environment to support independent thinking and developing the spirit of team work.
(3) Expected Graduate Attributes:
(1) Skill set to analyze abstract mathematical structures.
(2) Understanding about the recent areas in pure and applied mathematics such as
algebra, analysis, statistics and computation.
(3) Ability to formulate mathematics from computational aspect.
(4) Knowledge and capability to develop and apply mathematical models for real life
problems.
(5) Skill set to understand the abstraction of mathematical structures.
(6) Analytical and scientific skill set to pursue higher studies and research in diverse
areas of mathematics.
(7) Ability to express ideas in the written and oral formats.
(4) Learning Outcomes:
(1) Understanding of fundamental aspects of real, complex and functional analysis.
(2) Basic understanding of linear and abstract algebra.
(3) Knowledge about basics and use of probability theory, statistics and differential
equations.
(4) Skill set to cater computational aspects using programming techniques.
(5) Basic understanding of symbolic solution tools such as MATLAB or Mathematica.
(6) Demonstrate skills to communicate scientific ideas and/or application systems.
4
(7) Acquire project management skills.
(5) Program Structure:
Cat. Course
Number
Course Title L-T-P-
D
Credits Cat. Course
Number
Course Title L-T-P-
D
Credits
Semester 1 Semester 2
C MAL6XX0 Linear
algebra
3-0-0-
1
4 C MAL6XX0 Abstract
Algebra
3-0-0-1 4
C MAL6XX0 Real analysis 3-0-0-
1
4 C MAL5XX0 Complex
Analysis
3-0-0-1 4
C MAL6XX0 Ordinary
Differential
equations
3-0-0-
1
4 C MAL6XX0 Partial
Differential
equations
3-0-0-0 3
C MAL5XX0 Probability
and
Statistics
3-0-0-
1
4 C MAL6XX0 Functional
analysis
3-0-0-0 3
C MAL5XX0 Programming
Techniques
2-0-2-
0
3 PE Xxxxx PE1 3-0-0-0 3
C MA5XX0 Data
Structures and
Algorithms
1-0-2-0 2
Total 19 Total 19
Semester 3 Semester 4
C MAL6XX0 Topology 3-0-0-
0
3 PE Xxxxx PE5 3-0-0-0 3
PE Xxxxx PE2 3-0-0-
0
3 PE Xxxxx PE6 3-0-0-0 3
PE Xxxxx PE3 3-0-0-
0
3 OE Xxxxx OE2 3-0-0-0 3
PE Xxxxx PE4 3-0-0-
0
3
OE Xxxxx OE1 3-0-0-
0
3
P MAP7XX0 Project 0-0-0-
5
5 P MAP7XX0 Project 0-0-
0-10
10
Total 20 Total 19
Grand total 77
S.No. Category Course
Category Title
Total
Courses
Total
Credits
1 C Compulsory 11 38
2 PE Program Electives 6 18
3 OE Open Elective 2 6
4 P Project 2 15
Total 77
(6) Topic Cloud
Compulsory Topics:
(a) Linear Algebra (Finite dimensional Vector Spaces, linear transformations, Inner
Product Spaces, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Jordan canonical forms, Matrix
theory, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Spectral Analysis)
5
(b) Real Analysis (Basic properties of real system, study of Metric spaces, Calculus of
several variables, Function spaces), Abstract Algebra (Basic algebraic structures,
group theory, ring theory, Galois Theory)
(c) Topology (Topological structures and their properties, transformation between
topological spaces), Functional Analysis (Normed linear spaces, Banach spaces, Lp
Spaces, Hilbert Spaces, Linear transformations and their properties)
(d) Complex Analysis (Fundamental theorem of Complex Analysis, Residue theorem,
Contour integration and its applications, evaluation of Improper integrals, conformal
mappings)
(e) Probability theory (Univariate and multi-variate Probability Distributions and their
properties, weak laws of large numbers, central limit theorem).
(f) Statistics (sampling distributions, estimation of parameters, interval estimation,
testing of hypotheses), Statistical modelling (Estimation of parameters, Interval
estimation, Testing of hypotheses)
(g) Ordinary Differential Equations (Existence and Uniqueness of solution, Sturm-
Liouville problems and properties of its solutions)
(h) Partial differential equations and their applications
(i) Fundamentals of Programming
(j) Numerical Techniques (Root finding methods, Solution for system of linear
equations, Power method), Solution to System of linear Equations, Interpolation,
Numerical solution of Ordinary Differential Equations.
Elective Topics:
Fourier analysis, Wavelets analysis, Dynamical Systems, Operations Research, Number
Theory, Calculus of Variations, Integral Equations, Statistical Inference, Graphs Theory,
Stochastic Calculus, Measure and Integration, Chaos Theory, Numerical Methods for
Partial Differential Equations, Discrete Mathematics.
(7) List of Electives
(a) Department of Mathematics
 MAL7XX0: Measure and Integration
 MAL7XX0: Financial Engineering
 MAL7XX0: Wavelets analysis and Applications
 MAL7XX0: Dynamical Systems
 MAL7XX0: Optimization
 MAL7XX0: Numerical Analysis
 MAL7XX0: Number Theory
 MAL7XX0: Statistical Inference
 MAL7XX0: Graph Theory
 MAL7XX0: Calculus of Variation and Integral Equations
 MAL7XX0: Stochastic Calculus
 MAL7XX0: Algebraic Number Theory
 MAL7XX0: Machine Learning and Pattern Recognition
 MAL7XX0: Chaos Theory and its Applications
 MAL7XX0: Representations of finite groups
 MAL8XX0: Numerical Partial Differential Equations
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - I (1-0-0-0)
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - II (2-0-0-0)
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - III (3-0-0-0)
6
(b) From sister Departments
 Theory of Vibrations
 Finite Element Methods in Engineering
 Incompressible Fluid Flow
 Computer Graphics
 Advanced Computer Graphics
 Digital Image Analysis
 Statistical Signal Analysis
 Statistical Decision Theory
 Computational Imaging
 Multimedia Communication
 Classical Mechanics
 Quantum Mechanics
 Statistical Physics
 Introduction to Quantum Technologies
7
(8) Content of compulsory courses:
Course Title Linear Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for
further applications in their respective domains of interest.
Learning Outcomes
1. Concept of linear spaces, mapping between spaces, norm and their action on
spaces.
2. Eigenvalues, eigenvectors and diagonalization, and Primary decomposition
theorem.
3. Normal operators and Spectral theory of real symmetric normal operators.
Contents
Vector Spaces, Matrices and System of Linear Equations [10 Lectures]: System of
linear equations,Matrices and rank, Vector Spaces over fields, Subspaces, Bases and
dimension, Direct sum of the sub spaces.
Linear Transformation and Inner Product Spaces [10 Lectures]: Linear
Transformations, Rank and Nullity theorem, Representation of linear transformations
by matrices, duality and transpose. Inner product spaces, Gram-Schmidt
orthonormalization, orthogonal projections.
Operators and Spectral Theorem [20 Lectures]:Linear functionals and adjoints,
Hermitian, self-adjoint, Unitary and normal operators, Spectral theorem for real
operators, Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors, Characteristic polynomials, minimal polynomials,
Cayley Hamilton Theorem, triangulation, diagonalization, Jordan canonical forms
(without proof).
Textbook
1. Hoffman, K., and Kunze R., Linear Algebra, Pearson Education (India) 2003.
2. Herstein, I.N., Topics in Algebra, 2nd Edn., John Wiley and Sons.
3. Lax, P., Linear Algebra and its applications, John Wiley & Sons, Indian Edition 1997
4. Lang, S., Linear Algebra, 3rd Edition, Springer, 2004.
Reference Books
1. Artin, M., Algebra, Prentice Hall of India, 1994.
2. Axler, S., (1997), Linear Algebra Done Right.
3. Kumaresan, S., (2000) Linear Algebra – A Geometric Approach, PHI Learning.
4. Sharma, R. K., Shah, S. K. and Shankar, A. G., Algebra I: A Basic Course in
Algebra, Pearson Education, 2011.
Online course Material
1. Rana, I.K., Basic Linear Algebra, NPTEL Course material, Department of
Mathematics, IIT Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111101115/
8
Course Title Real Analysis Course No. MAL6XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. To train the student in the area of real analysis
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for
further applications in their respective domains of interest
Learning Outcomes
1. Metric spaces, completeness and Baire Category.
2. Continuity, Uniform continuity, Contraction mapping, fixed point theorem.
3. Connectedness and Compactness and Heine-Borel theorem.
4. Function spaces, Weiestrass approximation theorem.
Contents
Real Number System, Limits and Continuity [10 Lectures]: Countable and uncountable
sets, the axiom of choice, Zorn’s lemma, Real number system, Consequences of
completeness property, limit and continuity of functions, uniform continuity.
Metric Spaces [10 Lectures]: Metric spaces, continuous and uniformly continuous
functions, bounded and totally bounded sets, Compactness, Heine-Borel Theorem,
Completeness, Cantor’s Intersection theorem, Baire spaces, Connectedness.
Sequences and Series of Functions: [10 Lectures]Sequences and Series of functions,
Uniform convergence, Uniform convergence and integration, Uniform convergence and
differentiation,
Multivariable Calculus [10 Lectures]: Functions of several variables, continuity,
differentiability, partial derivatives, Jacobian, Inverse Function Theorem and the Implicit
Function Theorem, multivariable integration, Fubini’s theorem, Change of variables, Line
integrals, surface integrals, Green’s theorem, Divergence theorem, Stokes theorem, and
applications.
Textbook
1. Aliprantis, C.D., and Burkinshaw, O., Principles of Real Analysis, 3rd Edition.
2. Apostol, T., Mathematical Analysis, 2nd Edition, Narosa, 2002.
3. Ghorpade, S.R., and Limaye, B.V., A Course in Multivariable Calculus and Analysis,
Springer.
Reference Books
1. Royden, H. L., Real Analysis, Third Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, 1988.
2. Rudin, W., Priciples of Mathematical Analysis, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1976.
3. Davidson, K. R., and Donsig, A. P., Real analysis and applications: Theory in
practice, Springer Publications, 2010.
4. Bartle, R., Sherbert, D., Introduction to Real Analysis, 3rd Edition, Wiley 2011.
Online course Material
1. Kulkarni, S.H., Real Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics,
IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106053/
9
Course Title Ordinary Differential Equations Course No. MAL6XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of ordinary
differential equations
2. Develop analytical techniques to solve ordinary differential equations
3. Understand the properties of solution of ordinary differential equations
Learning Outcomes
1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of
ordinary differential equations
2. Solving ordinary differential equations with series method, Green's function
method
3. Solving systems of ODEs, and characterization of their solutions
Contents
Motivations and origins, Existence-Uniqueness [7 Lectures]: Existence of solutions by
Picard’s method, uniqueness and continuous dependence w.r.t. initial conditions and
parameters, continuation of solutions, existence and uniqueness of solutions to
system of differential equations.
Second Order Linear Equations [23 Lectures]: General solution of differential
equations using method of undetermined coefficients, method of variation of
parameters, variable coefficients equations, Power series solution method, Legendre’s
equation, Frobenius method, Bessel’s equation, Green's function method, Sturm-
Liouville problems, orthogonal eigen-function expansions, Sturm comparison theorem,
Sturm separation theorem,
Systems of Differential Equations [10 Lectures]: Phase plane method, critical points of
the system and their stability analysis, algebraic properties of solutions, the
eigenvalue-eigenvector method of finding solutions, fundamental matrix solutions,
matrix exponential, nonhomogeneous equations.
Text Books
1. Ross, S. L., Introduction to ordinary differential equations, 4th Ed., John Wiley
Publications, 1989
2. Braun. M., Differential Equations and Their Applications, 3rd Ed., Springer-Verlag,
1983
3. Chicone, C., Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications, 2nd Ed., Springer,
2006
Reference Books
1. Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations, PHI
Learning 1999
2. Birkhoff, G. and Rota G., Ordinary Differential Equations, 4th Ed., Wiley
Publications, 1989
3. Simmons, G., Differential Equations with Applications and Historical Notes, 2nd
Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017
Online Course Material
1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey, D. N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IITRoorkee,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/
10
2. Raghavendra V., Ordinary differential equations, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Mathematics, IIT Kanpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104031/
11
Course Title Probability and Statistics Course No. MAL5XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. Demonstrate an understanding of the basic principles of probability theory.
2. Use of the properties of discrete and continuous random variables with their
joint, marginal, and conditional distributions.
3. Use of the various families of probability distributions to model various types of
data.
Learning Outcomes
1. Understanding of probability theory and statistics to solve industrial problems.
2. Understanding of random sampling, theory of estimation and testing of
hypotheses.
Contents:
Probability spaces and Random Variables[15 lectures]: Probability measure,
conditional probability, Bayes’ theorem, Random variable, cumulative distribution
function and its properties, probability density function, functions of a random
variable, standard discrete and continuous distributions and their applications,
Transformation, moments, Chebychev’s inequality.
Joint Distributions[10 lectures]: Random vectors, joint, marginal and conditional
distributions, conditional expectation, independence, correlation and regression, Bi-
variate normal distribution, functions of random vectors, transformation.
Limit Theorems[3 lectures]: Convergence of sequences of random variables, weak and
strong laws of large numbers, central limit theorems.
Estimation and Tests of Hypotheses[14 lectures]: Sampling distributions, estimation of
parameters, maximum likelihood method and method of moments, interval estimation,
testing of hypotheses.
Text Books
1. Rohatgi, V. K., and Saleh, A. K. M. E., An Introduction to Probability and
Statistics, Second Edition, Wiley India, 2000.
2. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning.
3. Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. and Stone, C.J. (1971). Introduction to Probability Theory,
Houghton Mifflin Series in Statistics.
Reference Books
1. Hogg, R. V., McKean J. W., and Craig A., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics,
Sixth Edition, Pearson Education India, 2006.
2. Prakasa Rao, B. L., S., A First Course in Probability and Statistics, World
Scientific/Cambridge University Press India, 2009.
3. Castaneda, L. B., Arunachalam, V., and Dharmaraja, S., Introduction to
probability and stochastic processes with Applications. Wiley, 2012
Online Course Material:
1. Kumar, S., Probability and Statistics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105090/
12
Title Programing techniques Number MAL5XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 2–0–2-0
[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. introduce the basics of computer programming in C/C++.
2. Teach to develop well-structured programs in C/C++.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Write well structures programs in C/C++.
2. Implement and solve algebraic and transcendental equations and system of
equations numerically.
Contents
Introduction[2 Lectures]:machine language, assembly language, high-level programming
languages, compiler, interpreter, loader, linker, and flowchart.
Basic features of programming (Using C/C++) [8 Lectures]:Data types, variables,
operators, expressions, control structures, functions, parameter passing conventions.
Advanced features of programming [8 Lectures]: Pointers, arrays, operations on data
(Insert, delete, search, traverse and modify), structures, introduction to classes.
Root finding methods [4 Lectures]: Bisection method, Secant method, the method of
false position, Newton-Raphson method.
Solution of system of linear equations [6 Lectures]: Gauss elimination, Gauss-Jordan
method, LU decomposition, Crout's Method, Do-little Method, and Cholesky
decomposition.
Textbooks
1. Balaguruswamy, E., Programming in ANSI C, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2004.
2. Lafore, R., Object-Oriented Programming in C++, Fourth Edition, Pearson, 2002.
3. Burden, R. L., Numerical Analysis, Ninth Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012.
Reference Books
1. Schildt, H., C: The Complete Reference, Fourth Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000.
2. Datta, B. N., Numerical Linear Algebra and Applications, 2nd Edition, PHI, 2010.
Online Course Material
1. Kumar, S.A., Principles of Programming Languages, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102067/.
2. Gupta, D., Introduction to Problem Solving and Programming, NPTEL Course
Material, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106104074/.
3. Nayak, A. K. and Kumar S., Numerical methods, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107105/.
13
Course Title Abstract Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. To train the student in the domain of Abstract Algebra.
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for
further applications in their respective domains of interest.
Learning Outcomes
1. Modules, Dual modules, Cyclic Primary modules and Decomposition theorem.
2. Nilpotent and Solvable groups, Galois Theory, splitting Fields, Normal extension,
Fundamental theorem of Galois theory
Contents:
Group Theory [10 lectures]: Review of Group theory (Symmetric Groups,
Transformation Groups), Abelian groups, Sylow Theorems, nilpotent and solvable
groups.
Ring Theory [11 lectures]: Rings, Polynomial Rings, Prime ideals, Maximal Ideals,
Principal Ideal Domain, Unique Factorization domain, Euclidian Algorithm.
Field extensions [5 lectures]: Finite extension, algebraic extensions.
Galois Theory [16 lectures]: Galois Theory, splitting Fields, Normal extension,
Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory and its applications.
Text Book
1. Cohn, P. M., Basic algebra: Groups, rings and fields, 2 Ed., Springer, 2005
2. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra I, Dover Publication, 2009
3. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra II, Dover Publication, 2012
Reference Books
1. Artin, M., Algebra, Second Edition, Pearson, 2010
4. Dummit, D. S. and Foote, R. M., Abstract algebra, 3 Ed., Wiley, 2004
5. Stewart, I., Galois Theory, Third Edition, Chapman and Hall, 2003
Online Course Material:
1. Gross, B., Abstract Algebra, Online Course Material, Harvard Extension School,
http://matterhorn.dce.harvard.edu/engage/ui/index.html#/1999/01/82345
14
Course Title Complex Analysis Course No. MAL5XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. To train the student in the area of complex analysis.
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for
further applications in their respective domains of interest.
Learning Outcomes
1. Cauchy-Riemann Equations, Homotopy of paths.
2. Cauchy-Goursat theorem and Cauchy’s Integral Formula.
3. Evaluation of improper integrals.
Contents
Introduction to functions of complex variables [14 Lectures]: Elementary functions,
continuity, differentiability, Analytic Functions, Cauchy Riemann Equations.
Complex Integration[14 Lectures]: Line and Contour Integrals, anti-derivatives of a
complex function, Cauchy-Goursat Theorem, Simply and multiply connected domains,
Cauchy’s Integral formula, Taylor and Laurent Series expansion, Liouville’s Theorem,
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, Maximum modulus principle.
Residue Theory[10 Lectures] Residues and poles, Cauchy’s residue theorem, Jordan’s
Theorem, evaluation of Improper integrals
Conformal mappings[4 Lectures]: Conformal mapping, Special transformation,
Mobious transformation.
Text Books
1. Lang, S., Complex Analysis, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag, 1999
2. Brown, J. W. and Churchill, R. V., Complex variables and applications, 9 Ed.,
McGraw Hill Publications, 2013
Reference Books
1. Ahlfors, L.V., Complex Analysis, 3rd edition, McGraw Hill, 2000.
2. Ablowitz, M. J., and Fokas, A. S., Complex variables: Introduction and
applications, 2 Ed., Cambridge University Press, 2003.
3. Shastri, A.R., An Introduction to Complex Analysis, Macmillan India, New Delhi,
1999.
Online Resources
1. Sree Krishna, P.A.S., Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Mathematics, IIT Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103070/
2. Swaminathan, A. and Katiyar, V.K. Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107056/
15
Course Title Partial Differential
Equations
Course No. MAL6XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of partial differential
equations
2. Develop analytical techniques to solve partial differential equations
3. Understand the properties of solution of partial differential equations
Learning Outcomes
1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of partial
differential equations
2. Solving partial differential equations with Fourier series method, Green's function
method, Laplace transform method, and Fourier transform method
Contents
Motivations and origins [3 Lectures]: PDEs of engineering and physics (Heat, wave and
Laplace equations).
First order partial differential equations [9 Lectures]: Linear, quasi-linear and fully
nonlinear equations, Lagrange method, the Cauchy problem, Cauchy method of
characteristics, compatible systems, Charpit method.
Second order partial differential equations [12 Lectures]: Classification and Canonical
forms, Adjoint operators, Riemann’s method, solving linear partial differential equations
with constant coefficients.
Elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic equations[16 Lectures]: Variable separation method for
Laplace/Poisson equation, heat conduction equation, wave equation, Burger equation,
D’Alembert’s solution, Maximum-Minimum principles, Duhamel’s principle, solutions by
Green’s function method.
Text Books
1. Rao, K. S., Introduction to partial differential equations, 3rd Edition, PHI, 2011
2. Logan, J. D., Applied partial differential equations, 3rd Ed., Springer, 2015
3. Pinchover, Y. and Rubinstein, J., An introduction to partial differential equations,
Cambridge University Press, 2005
Reference Books
1. Sneddon, I. N., Elements of Partial Differential Equations, McGraw-Hill, New
York,1986
2. Prasad, P. And Ravindran, R., Partial differential equations, New Age
International Publisher, 2005
3. Mattheij, R. M. M., Rienstra, S. W., and ten Thije Boonkkamp, J. H. M., Partial
Differential Equations: Modeling, Analysis, Computation, SIAM Publication, 2005
Online Course Material
1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey D.N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/
2. Sinha, R. K., Partial differential equations, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Mathematics, IIT Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103021/
16
Title Functional Analysis Number MAL6XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0
[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To introduce the area of Functional analysis.
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further
applications in their respective domains of interest.
Learning Outcomes
1. Basic idea of a normed linear spaces and operators on normed linear space.
2. Open Mapping theorem, Hahn-Banach Theorem and their applications.
Contents
Normed Linear Spaces[14 Lectures]: Normed linear space, subspace of a normed linear
space, Equivalent norms, Finite Dimensional normed linear spaces, Banach spaces,
Linear operator, norm of a linear operator, boundedness and continuity, Quotient spaces.
Integrability and Extension Theorems[19 Lectures]: Integrable functions, l_p spaces,
Minkowski's inequality, Holder's inequality, separability of l_p spaces, uniformly bounded
operator, principle of uniform boundedness, Sub-linear functional, Semi-norm, Open
mapping theorem, Closed graph theorem, Hahn-Banach Theorem, dual of a normed
linear space, reflexive normed linear space.
Hilbert Spaces and their Applications [9 Lectures]: Inner product spaces, polarisation
identity, Bessel's inequality, Hilbert space, Riesz representation theorem, Operators on
Hilbert spaces, compact operators, projections and idempotents.
Text Books
1. Limaye, B. V., Functional Analysis, Second Edition, New Age International, 1996
2. Lax, P. D., Functional Analysis, First Edition, 2001
3. Ruddin, W., Functional Analysis, 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017
Reference Books
1. Conway, J. B., A course in Functional Analysis, Second Edition, Springer-Verlag,
1994
2. Goffman, C., and Pedrick, G., A First Course in Functional Analysis, Prentice-Hall,
1974
Online Course Material
1. Srivastava, P. D., Functional Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/111105037/
17
Course Title Data Structures and Algorithms Course No. MAP5XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–2-0 [2]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. To provide sufficient skills to prove and analyze efficiency of the algorithms.
2. To introduce elementary data structures and related operations.
Learning Outcomes
1. Ability to design correct programs to solve problems.
2. Skills to choose efficient data structures and apply them to solve problems.
3. Ability to show the correctness and efficiency of a program.
Contents
Performance of algorithms[3 lectures]: Algorithm Development, Complexity analysis
and asymptotics.
Data structures [11 lectures]: Arrays, pointers, linked lists, stacks, queues, binary
trees, tree traversals.
A programming laboratory will be set in consonance with the topics covered in
lectures. This will include assignments in a programming language like C and C++ in
GNU Linux environment.
Text Books
1. Cormen, T.H., Leiserson, C.E., Rivest, R.L. and Stein, C., Introduction to
Algorithms, 2nd Ed.,Prentice-Hall of India, 2007.
2. Sahni, S., Data Structures, Algorithms and Applications in C++, 2nd Ed.,
Universities Press, 2005.
Reference Books
1. Aho, A. V., Ullman, J. D., and Hopcroft, J. E. (1985), Data Structures and
Algorithms, Addison-Wesley.
2. Goodrich, M.T. and Tamassia, R., Data Structures and Algorithms in Java, Wiley,
2006.
Online course material
1. Garg, N., Data Structures And Algorithms, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102064/.
18
Title Topology Number MAL6XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0
[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To train the students in the domain of Topology.
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further
applications in their respective domains of interest.
Learning Outcomes
1. Topological spaces, order topology and product topology.
2. Separation axioms, countability axioms Urysohn’s metrization theorem.
3. Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence, Stone-Weierstrass Theorem.
Contents
Basic Topology [14 Lectures]: Topological spaces, basis and sub-basis, order topology,
product topology, subspace topology, convergence, closed sets, continuous functions,
quotient topology
Properties of Topological Spaces [17 Lectures]: Connected spaces, Components, local
connectedness, compact spaces, limit point compactness, local compactness,
Countability axioms, separation axioms, normal spaces, Tychonoff spaces, Urysohn’s
metrization theorem, Tietze extension theorem, Tychonoff theorem, Stone-Cech
compactification
Special Topics [09 Lectures]: Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence,
compact-open topology, uniform convergence on compact set, Stone-Weierstrass
Theorem.
Text Books
1. Munkres, J., Topology, second edition, Pearson Publications, 2000
2. Willard, S., General Topology, Dover Publications, 2004
Reference Books
1. Pervin, W. J. and Boas, R. P., Foundations of general topology, Academic Press,
1964
2. Simmons, G. F., Introdunction to topology and modern analysis, Tata McGraw-
Hill, 2004
Online Course Material
1. Veeramani, P., Topology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT
Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106054/.
19
(9) Content of Elective courses:
Title Measure and Integration Number MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D
[C]
3–0–0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. Provide background in the area of Measure Theory.
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for
further applications in their respective domains of interest.
Learning Outcomes
1. Provide basic understanding of the measures, total variation, absolute continuity,
and Radon-Nikodym Theorem.
2. Impart knowledge in Derivatives of measures, Fundamental Theorem, product
measures, Fubini’s Theorem, convolutions, Distribution functions.
Contents
Basics of Measure and Integration [12 Lectures]: Riemann Integration and need for
generalization, Measurable Sets, measurable functions, functions between measurable
spaces, Measures on Algebra of Sets, Extension Theorems, Lebesgue and Lebesgue-
Stieltjes measure, Measure, measure spaces.
Integrability [14 Lectures]: Simple functions and their integrals, integral of a non-
negative measurable function, integral of extended real valued non-negative function,
Monotone Convergence Theorem, Fatou’s lemma, Integrable functions, Lebesgue
Dominated Convergence Theorem, Lebesgue Spaces L_p, Holder’s Inequality,
Minkowski’s Inequality, completeness theorem, L_{\infinity}.
Modes of convergence [6 Lectures]: Relations between convergence almost
everywhere, convergence in measure and convergence in L_p spaces, Egoroff’s
Theorem.
Special Theorems (without proof) [14 Lectures]: Hahn Decomposition Theorem, Jordan
Decomposition Theorem, Radon-Nikodym Theorem, Lebesgue Decomposition
Theorem, Riesz Representation Theorem for L_p spaces.
Textbook
1. Royden, H.L., (1988), Real analysis, 3rd Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company,
New York
2. Bartle,R.G., (2014), The Elements of Integration and Lebesgue Measure, John
Wiley & Sons
3. Inder K.Rana, (2007), An Introduction to Measure and Integration, Narosa.
Reference Books
1. Parthasarathy, K.R., 2005, Introduction to Probability and Measure, TRIM Series,
Vol. 33, Hindustan book agency, New Delhi.
2. Halmos, P.R., 1976, Measure Theory, 1st Edition, Springer.
Online Course Material
1. Rana, I.K., Measure Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics,
IIT Bombay, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ma15/
20
Title Financial Engineering Number MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. Securities Pricing Securities, Risk Management Assessment, prediction and decision
making, under uncertainty, regarding future events and their consequences
2. Portfolio Optimization Balancing risk and return
3. Modeling Pricing of derivatives and Itos calculus
Learning Outcomes
1. Valuation of financial portfolio
2. Pricing of financial derivatives (options and contracts)
3. Understanding risk and return
Contents
[18 lectures]:Introduction to financial markets and financial instruments, financial
derivatives, risk and return, risky and risk free assets, interest rates, bonds, bonds pricing,
spot and forward rates, investment portfolio, mean-variance analysis, capital asset pricing
model, arbitrage pricing theory.
[22 lectures]:Discrete time models, stock and money market models, principle of no
arbitrage, pricing of contracts (forward and future), options, put-call parity, option pricing,
martingales, Binomial model, CRR model, Black-Scholes formula, Greeks, random walk,
Brownian motion, stochastic process, Itos integral and Ito-Deoblins formula.
Textbook
1. M. Capinski and T. Zastawniak, Mathematics for finance: an introduction to financial
engineering, Springer, 2010.
2. S.N. Neftci, Principles of financial engineering. Academic Press/Elsevier, 2009.
Reference Books
1. J.C. Hull, Options, futures and other derivatives. Pearson India, 2011.
2. S.E. Shreve, Stochastic calculus for finance I: The binomial asset pricing model,
Springer, 2000.
21
Course Title Wavelet Analysis and Applications Course No. MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. To introduce the origin of wavelet transform
2. To develop the understanding of multiresolution analysis for different types of
signals
3. To equip the students with various possible applications of the wavelet transform
Learning Outcomes
1. Strong understanding of Fourier and wavelet transform.
2. Answer to the question why wavelet transform is a better tool for signal analysis.
3. Implement and apply wavelet transform for various applications.
Contents
Fourier Analysis [12 Lectures]: Fourier and inverse Fourier transforms, Gabor
transform, short time Fourier transform and the uncertainty principle.
Wavelet Analysis [18 Lectures]: Mother wavelet, orthogonal and biorthogonal
wavelets, continuous and discrete wavelet transform, basic properties of wavelet
transforms, multiresolution analysis, Haar wavelet transform, Dabuchies Wavelet
Transform, wave-packet transform
Applications [12 Lectures]: Application of wavelet theory to feature detection, image
denoising and compression.
Text Books
1. Chui, C. K., An Introduction to Wavelets, Academic Press Inc., New York, 1992.
2. Debnath, L., Wavelet Transforms and Their Applications, Birkhauser, 2002.
3. Mallat, S., A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing, Academic Press, 1999.
Reference Books
1. Daubechies, I., Ten Lectures on Wavelets, Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 1992
2. Akansu, A.N., and Haddad, R.A., Multiresolution signal Decomposition:
Transforms, Subbands and Wavelets, Academic Press, Oranld, Florida, 1992
3. Kaiser, G., A Friendly Guide to Wavelets, Birkhauser, New York, 1995.
Online course Material
1. Gadre, V.M., Fundamentals of Wavelets, Filter Banks and Time Frequency
Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Bombay,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101093/.
2. Strang, G. and Amaratunga, K., Wavelets, Filter Banks and Applications, Online
Course Material, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-327-wavelets-filter-banks-and-
applications-spring-2003/.
22
Course Title Optimization Techniques Course No. MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. To train the student in the domain of linear and non-linear programming
2. To give sufficient tools for solving programming problems which can be used by
student for further applications in different areas of interest.
Learning Outcomes
1. Simplex method, Charne’s M-method, Two-phase Method
2. Duality and Integer programming problem
3. Transportation problem, assignment Problem, Karmakar’s Algorithm and Wolf’s
method
4. Newton’s method, Conjugate direction method and Quasi-Newton methods
5. KKT conditions, penalty and Barrier Methods, exact penalty functions
Contents
Linear Programming [23 lectures]: Linear combination of vectors, Convex set, Convex
hull, Linear programming problem, feasible solution, basic feasible solution, graphical
solution, Simplex method Charne’s M method, Two phase method, Solving system of
equations and finding the inverse of a matrix using simplex method, duality,
Complementary Slackness Theorem, Duality and Simplex method, dual simplex
algorithm, Integer Programming, Gomory’s cut-constraint method, Branch and Bound
method, Transportation problem, Assignment problem, application of optimization.
Nonlinear Programming [19 lectures]: First and second order conditions, Iterative
methods, line search methods, global convergence of descent algorithms, Newton’s
method, Conjugate direction method, Quasi-Newton Method, Constrained optimization
- Lagrange Multipliers, Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions, Regular points, Sensitivity
analysis, Quadratic Programming, Convex problems, applications of optimization.
Text Book
1. Luenberger, D. G., Linear and Nonlinear Programming, Yinyu Ye, Third Edition,
Springer, 2008.
2. Kambo, N. S., Mathematical Programming Techniques, Second Edition, Affiliated
East West Press, 2005
Reference Books
1. Bazaraa, M. S., Sherali, H.D., and Shetty, C. M., Nonlinear Programming: Theory
and Algorithms, Third Edition, Wiley publications, 2006
2. Darst, R, Introduction to Linear Programming: Applications and Extensions,
Dekker Publications, 1991
Online Course Material:
1. Goswami, A., Optimization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics,
IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105039/1
23
Course Title Numerical Analysis Course No. MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1. Learn numerical techniques for a variety of mathematical problems
2. Analyze the validity and error in the numerical results
Learning Outcomes
1. Develop an understanding of numerical error and applicability of a particular
method.
2. Solve numerically algebraic equations, linear systems of equations, ordinary
differential equations and eigenvalue problems.
3. Carry out numerical differentiation, integration, and interpolation
Contents
Errors analysis[4 Lectures]: Numerical Algorithms and errors, Floating point systems,
Types of error, Propagation of Error, the stability of algorithms.
Nonlinear equations [8 Lectures]: Newton-Raphson Method, Fixed-Point Iteration
Method, Muller’s method, criterion for acceptance of a root, Rates of Convergence.
Numerical solution of linear system of equations [8 Lectures]: Ill- conditioned systems,
iterative methods (Gauss-Seidel method, Gauss-Jacobi method), matrix inversion, Rate
of Convergence, Rayleigh Quotient, Min-max principle, the power and inverse power
methods for eigenvalue problems.
Interpolation [8 Lectures]: Errors in polynomial interpolation, finite differences,
Newton’s formulae for interpolation, Lagrange interpolation formula, Hermite
interpolation, Spline interpolation.
Numerical Integration and Differentiation [6 Lectures]: Newton-Cotes integration
formulae, Difference Formulae, Method of Undetermined Coefficients.
Numerical IVPs for Ordinary Differential Equations [8 Lectures]: Taylor series method,
Euler’s Method, Modified Euler’s Methods, Runge-Kutta Methods.
Tools to be used: MATLAB, Mathematica, Octave, Scilab.
Text Books
1. Süli, E. and Mayers, D.F., An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Cambridge Uni.
Press, 2006.
2. Sastry, S.S., Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, Prentice Hall of India
Pvt. Ltd., 2007.
3. Burden, R. L., Numerical Analysis, 9th Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012
Reference Books
1. Conte, S.D. and Boor, C., Elementary Numerical Analysis: An Algorithmic
Approach, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill Publication, 1980
2. Chapra, S.C., Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and
Scientists, 3 Ed., McGraw Hill, 2012
Online course Material
1. Lal, R. and Banerjee S., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department
of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107062/
2. Usha, R., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Mathematics, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106101/
24
Course Title Number Theory Course No. MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective
Pre-requisite
Objectives
1.To give basic knowledge of Number theory.
2. To equip students with number theoretic tools which can be used in their fields of
interest.
Learning Outcomes
1. Basic knowledge of Residue systems and RSA Cryptosystems.
2. Diophantine Equations, Pells Equation, Binary Quadratic Forms and their Applications.
Contents
Introduction [10 Lectures]: Divisibility, prime numbers, properties and their distribution,
complete and reduced residue systems, theorems of Fermat, Euler & Wilson, application to
RSA cryptosystem.
Congruences [10 Lectures]: Linear congruences, Chinese Remainder theorem, quadratic
congruences, and Quadratic Reciprocity law.
Arithmetical functions [15 Lectures]: examples, properties and their rate of growth,
Continued fractions, and their connections with Diophantine approximations, applications
to linear and Pell’s equations, Binary quadratic forms, Partition: basic properties and
results.
Diophatine equations [6 Lectures]: linear, quadratic and higher degree, some general
equations.
Text Books
1. David M. Burton, Elementary Number Theory. McGraw Hill Education, 2012.
2. G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright. An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers. Oxford
University Press, 1960.
Reference Books
1. Niven, H. S. Zuckerman and H. L. Montgomery. An Introduction to the Theory of
Numbers, Wiley, 1991
2. K. Ireland, and M. Rosen. A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory. GTM-
84, Springer, 1990.
Online Resources
1. Saikia, A., Number Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103020/.
25
Title Statistical Inference Number MAL7XX0
Departmet Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D. (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To provide background in the area of Statistics.
2. To provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for
further applications in their respective domains of interest.
Learning Outcomes
1. Basic understanding of the Point and Interval Estimation, Testing of Hypotheses,
Non-parametric Estimation
2. Knowledge in Random Sampling, Unbiased Estimation, Bias-Variance Tradeoff,
Goodness of Fit.
Contents
Random Sampling & Sampling Distributions [5 lectures]: Random sampling, exact
sampling distributions: Chi-square, t and F distributions, large sample theory.
Point and Interval Estimations [16 lectures]: Point estimator, properties of an estimator,
factorization, MVUE, maximum likelihood method of estimation, Cramer-Rao bound,
confidence interval estimation.
Tests of Hypotheses [21 lectures]: Review of hypotheses testing, Neyman-Pearson theory,
general linear hypothesis, method of least squares, analysis of variance (one way and two
way), analysis of categorical data, Chi-square test for goodness of fit, test of
independence, non-parametric tests.
Text Books
1. Rohatgi, V. K., Statistical Inference, Dover Publications Inc., 2003.
2. Hogg, R. V., McKean, J. W., Craig, A. T., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics,
Pearson, 2009.
Reference Books
1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. L., Statistical Inference, Brooks/Cole Publishing Company,
2003.
2. Rao, C. R., Linear Statistical Inference and Its Applications, Wiley, 2006.
3. Gibbons, J.D. and Chakroborti, S., Nonparametric Statistical Inference, CRC Press,
2010
Online Course material:
1. Zhou Fan, Introduction to Statistical Inference, Online Course Material, Stanford
University, http://web.stanford.edu/class/stats200/
2. Kumar, S., Statistical Inference, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105124/
26
Title Stochastic Calculus Number MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D
[C]
3–0–0-0
[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To develop an understanding of financial market
2. Given a discrete process, pricing of options, such as European, American, Asian
and other exotic options
3. To develop an understanding of change of measure, Martingales and Brownian
motion
4. Use of Black-Scholes model under various conditions
Learning Outcomes
1. Understanding derivatives and securities
2. Pricing and valuation in discrete case
3. Binomial model and self-financing strategy
4. Black Scholes model and interest rate models
Contents
[10 lectures]:General probability spaces, Gaussian and log-normal distribution,
martingales and stopping times, Brownian motion and its properties, Ito’s integral and
martingale properties of Ito’s integral.
[12 lectures]:Continuous time financial market models, Black-Scholes-Merton model,
Black-Scholes PDE and formulas, risk-neutral valuation, option pricing, the Greeks, put-
call parity, Risk-neutral valuation, risk-neutral measure, Girsanov's theorem for change
of measure, martingale representation theorems, representation of Brownian
martingales
[20 lectures]:Stochastic differential equations, existence and uniqueness of solutions,
Feynman-Kac formula and its applications, models with stochastic volatility, pricing and
hedging in incomplete markets, bond markets, term-structures of interest rates, bond
pricing, Short rate models, martingale models for short rate, Vasicek, Cox-Ingersoll-Ross
and Hull-White models, multifactor models; Forward rate models, Heath-Jarrow-Morton
model.
Textbooks
1. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance I; The Binomial Asset Pricing Model
, Springer-Verlag, 2004
2. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance II; Continuous-Time Model,
Springer, 2004.
Reference Books
1. Baxter, M. and Rennie, A., Financial Calculus, University Press, Cambridge 1996
27
Title Calculus of variations and Integral
Equations
Number MAL7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-D [3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Introduce variational problems with methods to solve them.
2. Introduce the integral transforms and integral equations, and their solution
methods
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Maximize or minimize functionals associated with the variational problems.
2. Apply integral transforms to solve differential equations.
3. Solve Fredholm and Volterra integral equations.
Contents
Calculus of Variation [20 Lectures]: Introduction to Variational problems, functionals,
Functional dependence on first order derivatives, Euler equations, Functional dependence
on functions of several independent variables, Variational problems with moving
boundaries, Rayleigh-Ritz and Galerkin’s Method.
Integral Transforms [8 Lectures]: Fourier, Fourier sine/cosine and Laplace transforms
and their properties, convolution theorem and application to solve differential equations.
Integral Equations [12 Lectures]: Classification of Integral equations, Neumann’s
iterative method for Fredholm’s equation of the second kind, Volterra type integral
equations, Integral equations of the first kind and Convolution type Integral Equations.
Text books
1. Gupta, A.S., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd. 1996
2. Debnath L. and Bhatta, D., Integral transformations and their applications, 2nd
Edition, Chapman and Hall / CRC publications, 2007
3. Moiseiwitsch, B. L., Integral equations, Logman, 1977
Reference Books
1. Gelfand, I. M. and Francis, S.V., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall, New Jersey,
1963
2. Yosida, K., Lectures on differential and integral equations, Dover, 1991
3. Hildebrand, F. B. , Methods of applied mathematics, 2nd Ed, Prentice-Hall, 1965
Online Course Material
1. Agrawal, P.N. and Pandey, D.N., Integral equations, calculus of variations and its
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107103/
28
Title Chaos Theory and its Applications Number MA7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0
[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To equip the students with the basic fundamentals of chaos theory.
2. Learning and understanding various routes to chaos.
3. To introduce applications of chaos to various physical systems and its introduction
in IFS.
Learning Outcomes
1. Notion of chaos in one dimension.
2. Understanding Bifurcation theory and different routes to chaos.
3. Two dimensional flows, phase portraits and chaos in higher dimension.
Contents
Discrete Dynamical Systems[16 Lectures]: One dimensional maps, Fixed points, periodic
points and Stability, Basin of Attraction, Bifurcation, period doubling and route to chaos,
Sharkovsky’s theorem, Li-Yorke Theorem, Lorentz System and chaos, Chaos in one
dimension, density of periodic points, transitivity, sensitive dependence on initial
conditions, cantor’s set, conjugacy, symbolic dynamics, Various notions of chaos, Phase
space diagrams, Linear Systems and their stability.
Continuous Dynamical Systems[14 Lectures]: One dimensional flows, chaos in one
dimension, Fixed points and Stability, Flows on the circle, Bifurcation, Saddle node
Bifurcation, Transcritical Bifurcation, Pitchfork Bifurcation, Hopf Bifurcation, phase
portraits, existence and uniqueness, fixed points and linearization, conservative
systems, limit cycles, Poincare-Bendixson Theorem.
Fractals and Dynamical Systems[12 Lectures]: Fractals, cantor set, dimension of self-
similar fractals, Box dimension, correlation dimension, Iterated Function System, Collage
Theorem and Image Compression, Julia and Mandelbrot Sets.
Textbook
1. Saber N. Elaydi, Discrete Chaos: With Applications in Science and Engineering,
CRC Press, Second Edition.
2. Steven H. Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applications to
Physics, Biology, Chemistry and Engineering, Westview Press, First edition.
Reference Books
1. H Nagashima and Y Baba, Introduction to Chaos: Physics and Mathematics of
Chaotic Phenomena, CRC Press; First edition.
2. G. Stuck and Michael Brin, Introduction to Dynamical Systems, Cambridge
University Press; First edition
Online Course Material
1. Nagar A. (IIT Delhi) Chaotic Dynamical Systems,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111102110/
2. Banerjee S. (IIT Kharagpur), Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic Systems,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/
29
Title Machine Learning and Pattern
Recognition
Number MA7XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0
[3]
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Introduce the mathematical and statistical techniques used in pattern recognition.
2. Impart knowledge on differentiate among various pattern recognition techniques.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Formulate high dimensional feature vectors from observations.
2. Select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analysing data in a given feature
space.
3. Apply pattern analysis tools to practical applications and detect patterns in the
data.
Contents
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Definitions, data sets for Pattern Recognition, Different
Paradigms of Pattern Recognition.
Bayes Decision Theory [8 Lectures]: Bayes Decision Theory: Bayes decision rule,
Minimum error rate classification, Normal density and discriminant functions, Bayesian
networks.
Generative Methods [8 Lectures]: Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian Parameter
Estimation, Nonparametric techniques.
Discriminative Methods [8 Lectures]: Distance-based methods, Linear Discriminant
Functions, Artificial Neural Networks, Support Vector Machines.
Clustering and Principal Component Analysis [8 Lectures]: k-means clustering, Gaussian
Mixture Modeling, EM-algorithm, PCA, Kernel PCA, Probabilistic PCA.
Combining Classifiers [8 Lectures]: Bagging and Boosting, Adaboost, Bayesian Model
Averaging.
Textbook
1. Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E. and Stork, D., Pattern Classification 2/e, Wiley, 2002.
2. Bishop, C., Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 2006.
Reference Books
1. Theodoridis, S. and Koutroumbas, K. (2008) Pattern Recognition, Edition 4.
Academic Press.
2. MacKay, D.J.C. (2004) Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms,
Cambridge University Press.
3. Cristianini, N. and Taylor, J. S. (2000) An Introduction to Support Vector
Machines, Cambridge University Press.
Online Course Material
1. Das, S. and Murthy, C.A. (IIT Madras) Pattern Recognition,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106046/
30
Title Numerical solutions of Partial Differential
Equations
Number MAL8XX0
Department Mathematics L-T-P
[C]
3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective
Prerequisite Partial Differential Equations
Objectives
The Instructor will introduce
1. finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations
2. carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential
equations
2. carry out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes
Contents
Fractal 1: Numerical methods for PDE (MAL8XX1)
[8 Lectures] Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic
and hyperbolic problems.
[6 Lectures]Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion,
error estimates.
Fractal 2: Numerical Analysis for PDE (MAL8XX2)
Parabolic equations [6 Lectures]: Fourier analysis of the error, Alternating direction
implicit method
Elliptic equations [6 Lectures]: Stability analysis by the energy method, Error analysis
with a maximum principle, asymptotic error estimates, convergence result
Hyperbolic equations[10 Lectures]: CFL condition, Von Neumann stability Analysis,
upwind scheme, Lax-Wendroff scheme, leap-frog scheme, Hamiltonian systems and
symplectic schemes
Numerical linear algebra[6 Lectures]: Classical iterative Methods for solving linear
systems, large sparse linear systems, GMRES algorithm, preconditioned Conjugate
Gradient method, multigrid method (overview), Newton's method and its variations for
solving nonlinear systems.
Text books
1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential
Equations, Springer, 1997
2. Morton, K. W. and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential
equations, CUP, 2005
Reference Books
1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference
methods, Springer, 1995
2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997
Online Course Material
31
1. Nayak, A. K., Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL Course,
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/.