1
M.Tech & M.Tech-PhD
Program Course Curriculum
Department of Chemical Engineering
IIT Jodhpur
2
Program’s Structure
Overall Structure (M. Tech. Degree Requirements for Chemical Engineering)
Summary of Course Categories and credit distribution for M.Tech. (Chemical
Engineering)
S.N. Course Type Credits
1 M.Tech. Compulsory (MC) 17
2 M.Tech. Electives (ME) 17
3 M.Tech. Open (MO) 6
4 M.Tech. Project (MP) 16
Total Graded 56
5 Non-Graded (NG) 4
Total 60
Course Structure: Semester wise distribution of credits
Cat
.
Course Title L-T-P Cre
dits
Cat
.
Course Title L-T-P Cre
dits
I Semester II Semester
MC Advanced Transport
Phenomena
3-0-0 3 MC Advanced Process
Control and AI
Applications
3-0-0 3
MC Advanced Reaction
Engineering
2-0-2 3 MC Multi-component
Separation Processes
2-0-2 3
MC Advanced Chemical
Engineering
Thermodynamics
2-0-0 2 ME Program Elective 3-0-2 4
MC Advanced Mathematical
Methods in Chemical
Engineering
3-0-0 3 ME Program Elective 3-0-2 4
ME Program Elective 3-0-0 3 NG Professional Ethics 1-0-0 1
NG Technical Communication 1-0-0 1
Total (Graded+Non-graded) 15 Total (Graded+Non-graded) 15
III Semester IV Semester
MP Project 0-0-
10
5 MP Project 0-0-22 11
ME Program Elective 3-0-0 3 MO Open Elective 3-0-0 3
ME Program Elective 3-0-0 3 NG IP Management and
Exploitation
1-0-0 1
MO Open Elective 3-0-0 3
NG Systems Engineering and
Project Management
1-0-0 1
Total (Graded+ Non-graded) 15 Total (Graded+Non-graded) 15
3
M. Tech. Program: Topic Clouds
Figure: Pictorial representation of M.Tech., M.Tech.-PhD program in chemical
engineering with specialization
M.Tech. Compulsory Courses
Advanced
Transport
Phenomena
Advanced
Reaction
Engineering
Advanced
Chemical
Engineering
Thermodyna
mics
Advanced
Mathematical
Methods in
Chemical
Engineering
Advanced
Process Control
and AI
Applications
Multi-
component
Separation
Processes
 Review of
Fluid
Kinematics
 Conservative
Principles
and
Constitutive
Laws
 Coupled
Transport
Processes
 Turbulence
Modelling
 Multiple
parameter
estimation
 Transport
Phenomena
in Large
Scale and
Small Scale
Systems
 Introduction
to Advanced
Reactors
 Reaction
Stability
Analysis
 Nonideal
Reactors
 Gas-solid
and Liquid-
solid
Catalytic
Reactions
 Multiphase
Reactors,
Fluidised
Bed
Reactors
 Packed Bed
Reactors
 Review of
Classical
Thermodyna
mics
 Adsorption
Thermodyna
mics
 Chemical
Reaction
Thermodyna
mics
 Statistical
Thermodyna
mics
 Modelling of
ideal gases
and gas
mixtures
 Modelling of
Crystals
 Introduction
of vector
space
matric.
 Contraction
mapping
 Eigenvalue
problems
 Partial
differential
equations
 Special
ODEs and
adjoint
operators
 Solution of
PDEs by
different
methods.
 Introduction
to advanced
process
control; feed-
forward
control.
 Multivariable
control.
 AI and IoT in
control
systems,
 AI techniques
in process
monitoring,
fault
detection and
diagnosis
 Real time
computer
control of
process
equipment.
 Concepts
 Multi-
component
Distillation
 Liquid-
liquid
Extraction
 Separation
Processes
involving
Solid
Phase
 Crystallizat
ion, Drying
 Case
Studies
4
M.Tech. Electives (ME)
Program Electives
Group 1: Industry 4.0+Data Analytics
S. No. Group Courses Title L-T-P Credit
1 Industry Industrial Design 3-0-0 3
2 4.0+Data Chemometrics 3-0-0 3
3 Analytics Data Analytics in Process Modelling and Simulation 2-0-2 3
4 Computational Fluid Dynamics 3-0-2 4
5 Process Optimization 3-0-2 4
6 Process Engineering and AI Applications 2-0-2 3
7 Packaging of Electronic Devices – Polymeric materials & 3-0-2 4
Chemical Technology
8 Nanocomposite Membrane Technology 3-0-0 3
9 Artificial Intelligence-1 3-0-0 3
10 Machine Learning-1 3-0-0 3
11 Introduction to IoT 1-0-0 1
12 Nano-sensors 3-0-0 3
13 Additive Manufacturing 3-0-0 3
14 Robotics 3-0-2 4
15 Sensors and IoT Lab 0-0-2 1
16 Industry 4.0: Applications in Manufacturing Systems 1-0-0 1
Group 2: Reactive Chemical Processing
S.No. Group Course Title L-T-P Credit
1 Reactive Molecular Modeling of Catalytic Reactions 3-0-0 3
2 Chemical Heterogeneous Catalysis and Catalytic Reactors 3-0-0 3
3 Processing Characterization of Multiphase Reactors 3-0-0 3
4 Advanced Wastewater Treatment 3-0-2 4
5 Chemical Reactor Analysis 3-0-2 4
6 Selected Topics in Reactive Chemical Processing 3-0-0 3
7 Recent Advances in Reactive Chemical Processing 2-0-0 2
8 Current Topics in Reactive Chemical Processing 1-0-0 1
Group 3: Petroleum and Petrochemicals
S. No. Group Course Title L-T-P Credit
1 Petroleum and Petroleum Refinery Engineering 3-0-2 4
2 Petrochemicals Petrochemical Technology 3-0-0 3
3 Petroleum Production Engineering 3-0-0 3
4 Petroleum Reservoir Engineering 3-0-0 3
5 Process Safety and Hazards 3-0-0 3
6 Environmental Impact Assessment 3-0-0 3
7 Hydrogen and Methanol Economy 3-0-0 3
8 Selected Topics in Petroleum and Petrochemicals 3-0-0 3
9 Recent Advances in Petroleum and Petrochemicals 2-0-0 2
10 Current Topics in Petroleum and Petrochemicals 1-0-0 1
5
Group 4: Additional program Electives
S. No. Group Courses L-T-P Credit
1 Additional Advanced Fluid Dynamics 3-0-0 3
2 Electives Advanced Mass Transfer 3-0-0 3
3 Advanced Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3
4 Capillarity and wetting 3-0-0 3
6 Kinetics & Theory for Polymers 3-0-0 3
7 Catalytic Nanomaterials 3-0-0 3
8 Mechanics of Viscoelastic Materials 3-0-0 3
9 Structure & Property for Polymers 3-0-0 3
6
Detailed course contents
Program core
Title Advanced Transport Phenomena Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree in Chemical
Engineering
Type Compulsory
Prerequisite None
Objective
The instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth understanding of processes involving mass, energy, and momentum
transport.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand the fundamental aspects of transport phenomena at advanced level.
2. Develop an understanding and pursue graduate research in this area.
Contents
Introduction: Review of fluid kinematics, Control Volumes, Reynolds transport. (4 lectures)
Conservation Principles and constitutive laws: Mass, Momentum, Energy, Entropy; Phase
interface conditions, Solutions methods for equations of change, steady and unsteady fluid
flow, Creeping flow, Lubrication approximation, Boundary layer theorem. (12 lectures)
Coupled transport processes: Steady and Unsteady states phenomena, Forced convection
heat and mass transport in confined/unconfined laminar flows, low Peclet and high Peclet
approximations, buoyancy driven flows, Multi-component energy and mass Transport. (12
lectures)
Turbulence modelling: Characteristics of turbulent flows, length and time scales, energy
cascade, Reynolds averaged transport equations, Phenomenological models, Kolmogorov
hypotheses, universality and turbulence spectra. (10 lectures)
Transport phenomena in large-scale and small-scale systems: chemical reactors, micro-fluidic
devices. (4 lectures)
Text Books
1. Deen W. M., 1998, Analysis of Transport Phenomena, Oxford University Press, New
York.
2. Bird. R. B., Stewart, W. E. and Lightfoot, E. N., 2006, Transport Phenomena, 2nd
edition, John Wiley & Sons.
Reference Books
1. Slattery J.C., 1999, Advanced Transport Phenomena, Cambridge University Press.
2. Leal L. G., 2010. Advanced Transport Phenomena: Fluid mechanics and convective
transport processes, Cambrige University Pres.
3. Pope S. B., 2000, Turbulent Flows, Cambridge University Press.
4. Belfore, L. A., 2003, Transport Phenomena for Chemical Reactor Design, John Wiley &
Sons.
5. Ramachandran, P. A. 2014. "Advanced Transport Phenomena", Cambridge University
Press.
Online Course Material
1. R. Nagarajan, Advanced Transport Phenomena, NPTEL Course Material, Chemical
Engineering, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103106068/#
2. V. Kumaran, Fundamentals of Transport Processes, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Chemical Engineering, IIsc Bangalore,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/108/103108099/
7
Title Advanced Reaction Engineering Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-2 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree in Chemical
Engineering
Type Compulsory
Prerequisite None
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Impart knowledge of hydrodynamics and transport effects in multiphase reactors,
to learn lower order model for prediction of their performance.
2. Introduce industrial reactors,
3. Provide methodology to design multiphase reactors for a few specific applications.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to
1. In-depth understanding of hydrodynamics and transport effects in multiphase
reactors.
2. Design multiphase reactors.
Contents
Introduction to advanced reactors: Review of reaction kinetics and ideal reactors,
catalytic reactions, non-catalytic reactions (3 lectures)
Reaction Stability Analysis: Application of conformal mapping for identification of unique
steady state and the criteria for the same; estimation of multiple steady states; phase
diagram and Routh-Hurwitz criteria for stable steady state; linear stability analysis. (5
lectures)
Non-ideal reactors: Principles of non-ideal flow, central volume principle and RTD
theorems, data analysis and interpretation; Models for non-ideal flow patterns, tanks-
in-series (8 lectures)
Gas-Solid and Liquid-Solid Catalytic Reactions: Gas-solid reactions, Liquid-solid
reactions, Non-isothermal reactions, Effectiveness factor; Various regimes of gas-
absorption and reaction, Enhancement factor. (7 lectures))
Different reactors: Multiphase reactors, Fluidised bed reactors; Packed Bed Reactors. (5
lectures)
Design Labs (28 hrs)
1. Stability analysis
2. Reactor design: Tank in series
3. Design of mechanically agitated reactors
4. Bubble column reactor
5. Slurry bubble column reactor
6. Fluidised bed reactor
7. Trickle bed reactor
8. Non-catalytic heterogeneous reactor
9. Multi-phase reactor design
10. Packed bed reactor design
11. Two phase packed bed reactor
12. Three phase packed bed reactor
Text Books
1. Froment, G. F., K. B. Bischoff, 1990, Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, John
Wiley.
2. Doraiswamy, L. K. and D. Uner, 2013, Chemical Reaction Engineering: Beyond the
Fundamentals, CRC Press.
Reference Book
1. Carberry, J. J., Varma, A., 1986, Chemical Reaction and Reactor Engineering,
Marcell-Dekker
8
Online Course Material
1. Shankar, H.S., Advanced Chemical Reaction Engineering, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Bombay
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/101/103101001/
2. Viswanathan, G.A., Chemical Reaction Engineering II, NPTEL Course
Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT
Material,
Bombay,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/101/103101008/
9
Title Advanced Chemical Engineering
Thermodynamics
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-0 (2)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree in
Chemical Engineering
Type Compulsory
Prerequisite None
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about statistical thermodynamics and applications to
simple gas systems, lattice structures and structure–property analysis of such
systems.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. To apply in-depth knowledge of chemical reaction thermodynamics,
2. Molecular perspective of equilibrium and states of materials,
3. Statistical thermodynamics and applications.
Contents
Prelude to Advanced Thermodynamics: Structure property relationships of matter, degree
of freedom, equilibrium, review of classical thermodynamics, reversible and irreversible
processes; Adsorption Thermodynamics; Chemical Reaction Thermodynamics. (9
lectures)
Statistical Thermodynamics: probability postulate, Ergodic hypothesis, Probability analysis
and relating statistical properties to macroscopic properties. Microcanonical, Canonical
and Grand Canonical Ensembles, Molecular interactions and force fields (8 lectures)
Modelling of ideal gases (monatomic, diatomic, polyatomic):, degrees of freedom and
internal energy, specific heat capacity, entropy and free energy. Modelling of lattice
gas.
Modelling of gas mixtures. (6 lectures)
Modelling of crystals: Perfect crystals, defects. Internal energy and heat capacity, Modelling
of Adsorption, perturbation analysis. (5 lectures)
Text Book
1. Smith & Van Ness: Introduction to Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, McGraw
Hill, any edition from 4th – 7th.
Reference Books
1. Richard Elliot, Intro ductory Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, Pearson
Education, 2nd Edition, 2014
2. Terrel L Hill, Introduction to Statistical Thermodynamics, 1st Edition, Dover
Publications,1988
Online Course Material
1. Kishore, N., Advanced Thermodynamics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Chemical Engineering, IIT Guwahati
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103162/
10
Title Advanced Mathematical Methods in Chemical
Engineering
Number CLL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0
Offered for M.Tech. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Compulsory
Prerequisite Knowledge of Engineering Mathematics
Objective
To impart knowledge about advanced mathematical techniques in chemical engineering particularly
analytical maths.
Learning Outcomes
A successfully completed course should enable the student to have fair knowledge of advanced
mathematical methods in chemical engineering particularly analytical maths including eigenvalue
problems and partial differential equations.
Contents
Introduction of vector space metric, norm, inner product space examples, onto, into, one to one
function, completeness of space. (8 lectures)
Vectors: Linear combination of vectors, dependent/independent vectors, orthogonal and orthonormal
vectors, gram-schmidt orthogonalization. Contraction Mapping: Definition; applications in chemical
engineering; examples. Matrix, determinants and properties. (8 lectures)
Eigenvalue problem: Various theorems; solution of a set of algebraic equations; solution of a set of
ordinary differential equations; solution of a set of nonhomogeneous first order ordinary differential
equations (ivps), applications of eigenvalue problems: stability analysis; bifurcation theory; examples.
(7 lectures)
Partial Differential Equations: Classification of equations; Boundary conditions; Principle of Linear
superposition, Special ODEs and Adjoint operators: Properties of adjoint operator; sturm luiville theorem
for eigenvalues and eigenfunctions. (5 lectures)
Solution of linear, homogeneous PDEs by separation of variables: Cartesian coordinate system &
different classes of PDEs; cylindrical coordinate system; spherical coordinate system (8 lectures)
Solution of PDEs by different methods. (6 lectures)
Text Books
Pushpvanam S., Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering, Prentice Hall India Rice and Do,
Applied Mathematics and Modeling for Chemical Engineers, John Wiley and Sons, Inc
Mickley, Sherwood and Reed, Applied Mathematics in Chemical Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill
Reference Books
Verma, A. and Morbidelli, M., Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering Loney, N.W.
Applied Mathematical Methods for Chemical Engineers, CRC Press Online Course Material
Advanced Mathematical Techniques in Chemical Engineering,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/105/103105106/
11
Title Advanced Process Control and AI
Applications
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Compulsory
Prerequisite Introductory course on process control
Objective
The Instructor will provide knowledge about the advanced concepts in process control,
enabling multi- variable control, system identification, AI techniques in process control and
digital control with computer-aided case studies.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Have fair knowledge and understanding of the advanced concepts in process control
and AI techniques in process control.
Contents
Review of classical feedback control & transfer function approaches, State-space models,
Distributed parameter models (5 lectures)
Introduction to advanced process control; feed-forward control, ratio control, dead time
compensation (4 lectures)
Multivariable control & relative gain array (4 lectures)
Internal model control (3 lectures)
Z-transforms & introduction to digital control (4 lectures)
State estimation & system identification (5 lectures)
Adaptive control, nonlinear control, intelligent control (4 lectures)
Model predictive control (3 lectures)
AI and IoT in control systems, Fuzzy controllers, neural network for controllers, AI techniques
in process monitoring, fault detection and diagnosis (5 Lectures)
Real time computer control of process equipment, case studies & use of MATLAB control
system toolbox & SIMULINK (5 lectures)
Text Books
1. Coughanowr D. R. and LeBlanc S., 2008, Process System Analysis and Control, 3rd
Ed., McGraw Hill.
2. Ogunnaike B. A. and Ray W. H., 1994, Process Dynamics Modeling and Control, Oxford
University Press.
3. T.E. Quantrille and Y.A. Liu, 1991, Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Engineering,
Academic Press
Reference Books
1. Stephanopoulos G., 1990, Chemical Process Control – An Introduction to Theory and
Practice, Prentice-Hall of India.
2. Seborg D. E., Edgar T. F. and Mellichamp D. A., 2004, Process Dynamics and Control,
2nd Ed., John Wiley and Sons.
3. Bequette B. W., 2003, Process Control – Modeling, Design and Simulation, Prentice-
Hall of India.
Online Course Material
1. Patwardhan, S.C., Advanced Process Control, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Chemical Engineering, IIT Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/101/103101003/
12
Title Multi-component Separation Processes Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-2 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Compulsory
Prerequisite None
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about the multi-component separation processes that are
relevant to industries today.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain:
1. The understanding of multicomponent separation processes with relevant industry
examples and case studies.
2. The detailed knowledge about liquid-liquid extraction, multi-component distillation,
crystallization and drying processes
Contents
Concepts & Definitions: Basic separation techniques, Maxwell-Stefan equations and their
applications, estimation of diffusion coefficients, interphase multicomponent mass
transfer, industrial chemical processes, separation factor, mass transfer in laminar and
turbulent flow, models for mass transfer, degrees of freedom, azeotropic systems,
multiphase systems, cascade and hybrid systems (11 lectures)
Multi-component Distillation and Liquid-Liquid Extraction: McCabe–Thiele Graphical Method
for tray towers and its extension, stage efficiencies, equipment for solvent extraction,
Hunter–Nash graphical equilibrium-stage method, Theory and scale-up of extractor
performance, Fenske–Underwood–Gilliland (FUG) method, Equation-Tearing Procedures,
Newton–Raphson (NR) method, Inside-Out method, batch distillation (11 lectures)
Separation involving Solid phase: Crystallization, solid drying (6 lectures)
Design Labs (28 hours)
Design of a multi-component distillation column
Design of a liquid-liquid extraction unit
Design and development of a spray dryer
Spray drying of milk to get milk powder
Flash vaporization
Recovery of a protease inhibitor from an organic solvent via crystallization
Crystallization of p-xylene from a mixture with m-xylene
Separation by reverse osmosis
Micro-filtration
Separation of whey from cheese via ultrafiltration
Recovery of caustic from Hemicellulose via dialysis
Demineralization of water by ion-exchange
Text Book
1. Seader, Henley and Ropar (2011) Separation Process Principles, 3rd Edition Wiley.
2. Ross Taylor, R. Krishna, (1993) Multicomponent Mass Transfer, John Wiley &
Sons.
Reference Books
1. Humphrey, J. L. and Keller, G. E., 1997, Separation Process Technology, McGraw- Hill,
NY
2. Kister, H. Z., 1992, Distillation Design, McGraw-Hill.
13
Details of Elective Courses
Program Electives
Group 1: Industry 4.0+Data Analytics
Title Industrial Design Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme
Elective
Prerequisite Knowledge of Unit Operations, Fluid
Mechanics
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide knowledge of design and engineering problems of piping in process industries.
2. Provide knowledge of Industry4.0 in chemical companies.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Have fair knowledge and understanding of the design and engineering problems of
piping in process industries.
2. Contribute to Industry 4.0 related work in chemical companies.
Contents
Transport of Solids: slurry transport systems, Correlations for various flow regimes.
Conveying systems, solid gas flow pattern in different inclined pipe lines, Concept of saltation
and choking velocities, pressure drop calculations, Design of pneumatic systems. (12 lectures)
Flow of Fluids: Frictional loss, resistance of fittings, valves and bends, carrying capacity
of pipes and piping networks; Pressure drop and diameter calculations of pipe carrying steam,
water, oil and gases; Optimum pipe diameter and network design. (9 lectures)
Pipes and Fittings: Standards, codes and practices; Wall thickness, tolerances, design of
flanges and fittings, Flow regimes and piping design for two-phase flow; design of piping
for reboiler and condenser systems. (6 lectures)
Strength and Failure of Materials: Stable and unstable deformation, plasticity, plastic
instability, design assumptions, stress evaluation and design limits, codes and standards;
Local components of pipe bends, branch connections and bolted flange connections. (8
lectures)
Simplified Methods for Flexibility Analysis: Thermal expansion loops, approximate solutions
and flexibility analysis by model tests; Expansion joints and approaches for reducing
expansion effects. (4 lectures)
Industry 4.0 in chemical companies: Digitalisation to improve its operational efficiency,
Recycling, Sustainability aspects, AI in processing to automate knowledge. (3 lectures)
Text Book
1. Smith P., 2007, Fundamentals of Piping Design: Drafting and Design Methods for
Process Applications, Gulf Publishing.
2. Quantrille T.E. and Liu Y.A., 1991, Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Engineering,
Aademic Press.
Reference Books
1. Marcus R.D., 1990, Leung L.S., Klinzing G. E. and Rizk F., Pneumatic Conveying of
Solids, Chapman and Hall
2. Nayyar M.L., 2000, Piping Handbook, 7th Ed., McGraw Hill
3. Boterman R. and Smith P., 2008, Advanced Piping Design, Gulf Publishing.
4. Deutsch D.J., 1980, Process Piping Systems, McGraw Hill
Online Course Material
1. Moholkar V.S., Process Design Decisions and Project Economics, NPTEL course
material, Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103103039/
14
Title Chemometrics Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering, L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. Type Programme Elective
Prerequisite basics of chemical engineering
Objective
The instructor will:
1. Impart knowledge of modern methods of analyzing chemical data.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the:
1. Comprehensive knowledge of the modern methods of reducing and analyzing chemical
data.
Contents
Prelude to chemometrics: Introduction and history of Chemometrics, factorial analysis;
reverse, surface and mixture design; correlograms and time series analysis; sequential
methods, Pattern recognition. [6 lectures]
Calibration: introduction to multivariable calibration, selectivity problems, statistical problems
in calibration, Univariate calibration, multiple linear and principal components regression,
model validation, outlier detection. [6 lectures]
Evolutionary signals and process analysis in chemical plants: exploratory data analysis and
processing, determining composition, resolution pre-processing, composition of sequential
data, screening. [6 lectures]
Derivatives in Spectroscopy: Theoretical and computed derivatives, derivative approximation,
calibrating with derivatives, spectroscopic monitoring of reactions, kinetics and multivariable
model, online spectroscopy. [6 lecture]
General Data Analysis: simple analysis of variance and experimental design (one-way, two-
way with and without replicates, randomized and blocked designs). [6 lectures]
Computational methods: control structures for selection and iteration, functions, array data
structure, numerical methods for data analysis. [6 lectures]
Machine leaning in Chemical plants: Introduction, basics of decision trees, combining multiple
learner, reinforcement learning, experimental design and analysis. [6 lectures]
Text Book
1. Richard G. Brereton, 2003, Chemometrics: Data Analysis for the Laboratory and
Chemical Plant, Wiley
Reference Books
1. Harald Martens, Tormod Næs, 1989, Multivariate Calibration, John Wiley & Sons.
2. Howard Mark, Jerry Workman, Jr, 2018, Chemometrics in Spectroscopy, Elsevier
Academic Press.
3. Richard G. Brereton, 2007, Applied Chemometrics for Scientists, John Wiley & Sons.
4. Ethem Alpaydin, 2004, Introduction to Machine Learning, MIT Press.
5. Vandeginste, B.G.M., Massart, D.L., Buydens, L.M.C., Jong, de D., Lewi, P.J., Smeyers-
Verbeke, J., 1998, Handbook of Chemometrics and Qualimetrics: Part B, Elsevier.
6. Kreyszig, Erwin, 2014, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, John Wiley and Sons, 10th
Edition.
15
Title Data Analytics in Process Modelling and
Simulation
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-2 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree in
Chemical Engineering
Type Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Impart knowledge about the mathematical modelling of physical systems, data
analytics and introduce flow-sheet simulation as a tool for process analysis, enabling
systems approach in modelling of a process with interaction among several unit
processes and unit operations.
2. Provide insight into development of simulators to do steady-state and dynamic
simulation.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to:
1. Gain in-depth knowledge of the data analytics and mathematical modelling of physical
systems and process with interaction among several unit operations and have insight
into development of simulators to do steady-state and dynamic simulation.
Contents
Introduction to mathematical modelling: lumped vs distributed parameter systems, process
synthesis, design, simulation & analysis, Modelling of various chemical systems covering
heat, mass, momentum transfer, and reactions, Sequential and simultaneous modular
approaches for flow-sheet Simulation (9 lectures).
Equation solving approaches: Partitioning, Decomposition, Disjointing, PTM, SWS-, Steward-,
and Rudd-Algorithms, Direct Methods, Pivoting, Iterative methods, BTF, BBTF, Block Back
Substitution, BTS. (4 lectures)
Decomposition of networks: Tearing algorithms, digraph, MCN, signal flow graph, B&M
algorithm, BTA, K&S algorithm, M&H-1 & -2 algorithms, and related problems,
Convergence Promotion. (6 lectures)
Data analysis: Sources and data banks of physical & thermodynamic properties, Modularity &
Routing, Specific purpose simulation, Dynamic simulation (9 lectures)
Process Modelling and Simulation Design Lab (28 hrs)
Modelling of Heat exchange equipment (2)
Modular approaches for flow-sheet Simulation (4)
Process simulation using MATLAB (6)
Process simulation using ASPEN (6)
Distillation with reflux, reboiler and condenser (6)
Case studies: Process simulation of industrial scale processes and validation (4)
Text Book
1. Jana, A.K. Chemical Process Modelling & Computer Simulation, 2nd ed., PHI Learning,
2011
Reference Books
1. Babu, B.V. Process Plant Simulation, Oxford University Press, India, 2004.
2. Luyben, W.L. Process Modelling, Simulation & Control for Chemical Engineers, 2nd ed.,
McGraw Hill, 1990
Online Course Material
1. Agrawal, V.K., Process Modelling and Simulation, NPTEL Course Material, Department
of Chemical Engineering, IIT Roorkee
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/107/103107096/
16
Title Computational Fluid Dynamics Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective
Prerequisite Knowledge of Fluid Mechanics
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide an understanding of physical models to study hydrodynamics in engineering
systems.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Interpret and understand the physical models to study hydrodynamics in engineering
systems.
Contents
Introduction: Review of equations of change for transfer processes, Philosophy of
computational fluid dynamics (CFD), simplified flow models such as incompressible,
potential and creeping flow, flow classification. (5 lectures)
Grid Generation: Structured and unstructured grids, choice of suitable grid, grid
transformation of equations, some modern developments in grid generation for solving
engineering problems. (3 lectures)
Finite Difference Method (FDM): Discretization of ODE and PDE, approximation for first,
second and mixed derivatives, implementation of boundary conditions, discretization
errors, FDM applications to engineering problems (12 lectures)
Finite Volume Method (FVM): Discretization methods, approximations of surface integrals
and volume integrals, interpolation and differential practices, implementation of boundary
conditions, FVM application to engineering problems (11 lectures)
Special Topics and Case Studies: Flow and heat transfer in pipes and channels, square cavity
flows, reactive flow, multiphase flow, rotary kiln reactors, packed and fluidized bed
reactors, furnaces and fire systems, Overview of finite element method. (11 lectures)
CFD Design Lab (28 hrs)
Design Flow Models for:
Incompressible flow
Potential flow
Creeping flow
Greed generation technique
Discretization methods for ODE and PDE
Application technique of Finite Volume Method
Surface and volume integrals
Text Books
1. Fletcher C.A.J., 1998, Computational Techniques for Fluid Dynamics, Vol. 1:
Fundamental and General Techniques, Springer-Verlag.
2. Fletcher C.A.J., Computational Techniques for Fluid Dynamics, 1998, Vol. 2: Specific
Techniques for Different Flow Categories, Springer-Verlag.
Reference Books
1. Anderson J.D., 1995, Computational Fluid Dynamics, McGraw Hill.
2. Ghoshdastidar P.S., 1998, Computer Simulation of Flow and Heat Transfer, Tata
McGraw Hill.
3. Ferziger J.H. and Peric M., 2002, Computational Methods for Fluid Dynamics, 3rd Ed.,
Springer
4. Patankar S.V., 2004, Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow, Taylor and Francis.
Online Course Material
1. Jayanti, S., Computational Fluid Dynamics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Chemical Engineering, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/106/103106119/
17
Title Process Optimisation Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective
Prerequisite knowledge of Chemical Engineering
processes and Mathematics
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge of various techniques of optimization and their application
to chemical processes.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to:
1. Have fair knowledge of various techniques of optimization and their application to
chemical processes.
Contents
Introduction: Optimization and calculus based classical optimization Techniques (4 lectures)
One Dimensional Minimization Methods: Elimination methods- equally spaced points
method, Fibonacci method and golden section method; Interpolation methods- quadratic
interpolation and cubic interpolation, Newton and quasi-Newton methods, Linear
Programming (11 lectures)
Multivariable Non-Linear Programming: Unconstrained- Different methods for non-linear
programming; Constrained- complex method, feasible directions method, GRG method,
penalty function methods and augmented Lagrange multiplier method. (10 lectures)
Dynamic Programming: Multistage processes- acyclic and cyclic, sub-optimization,
principle of optimality and applications. (6 lectures)
Geometric Programming (GP): Differential calculus and Arithmetic-Geometric inequality
approach to unconstrained GP; Constrained GP minimization; GP with mixed inequality
constraints and Complementary GP, Emerging Optimization Techniques: Genetic
algorithm, simulated annealing, particle swarm and ant colony optimization. (11 lectures)
Process Optimisation Design Lab (28 hrs)
Solution of 1-D problems (4)
Linear programming problem (4)
Multi-variable nonlinear programming problem (4)
Dynamic programming problem (4)
Geometric programming problem (4)
Solution of case-studies problems (8)
Text Book
1. Edgar T.F., Himmelblau D.M. and Lasdon L.S., 2001,Optimization of Chemical
Processes, 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill.
Reference Books
1. Beveridge G.S.G. and Schechter R.S., 1970, Optimization: Theory and Practice,
McGraw Hill.
2. Rao S.S.,2009, Engineering Optimization Theory and Practice, 4th Ed., Wiley.
Online Course Material
1. Sarkar, D., Optimization in Chemical Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Chemical
Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/105/103105139/
18
Title Process Engineering and AI Applications Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-2 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree in Chemical
Engineering
Type Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Impart knowledge on the issues and techniques involved in designing of large-scale
chemical processes with multiple unit operations.
2. Impart knowledge about role of AI in process engineering.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to:
1. Have the fair understanding and knowledge about the issues and techniques
involved in designing of large-scale chemical processes with multiple unit operations
in industries.
2. Have the fair understanding about the role of AI in process engineering.
Contents
Introduction: History and Relation of Artificial Intelligence (AI) to Process Engineering;
Knowledge Representation I- Predicate calculus and Semantic Networks; flow-sheet
synthesis, concept of economic potential of batch, continuous and recycle reactors,
expert system shells. (8 lectures)
Neural Nets and Inexact Reasoning: Introduction and application to process engineering,
Blackboard Architecture. (4 lectures)
Reactors and separation systems: Guidelines for selection methods; Heat and energy
integration
by calculating demands and targets; distillation column sequencing; grand composite
curve
and utility targeting; steam and cooling water circuits; Problem solving using AI and
process
modelling tools. (12 lectures)
Process economics: cost estimation, annuities, tax, depreciation, profitability analysis, risk
management (4 lectures)
Process Engineering Design Lab (28 hrs):
Flow sheet analysis (2)
Economic model and comparison of reactors: Batch and Continuous reactors: Batch and
Recycle reactors, Continuous and recycle reactors (6)
Column sequencing and water circuits (6)
AI application in process equipment/ plant performance analysis (8)
Case studies on Chemical plant design (6)
Text Books
1. T.E. Quantrille and Y.A. Liu, 1991, Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Engineering,
Academic Press.
2. Douglas J.M., 1988, Conceptual Design of Chemical Processes, NY: McGraw-Hill.
3. Smith R., 2005, Chemical Process: Design and Integration, 1st ed. West Sussex,
UK: Wiley.
Reference Books
1. Seider, W. D., Seader,J.D. and Lewin, D.R., 2003, Product and Process Design
Principles: Synthesis, Analysis, and Evaluation, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Wiley.
2. Edgar and Himmelblau, 1988, Optimization of Chemical Processes, New York, NY:
McGraw Hill
19
Title Packaging of Electronic Devices – Polymeric
materials & Chemical Technology
Number CHL7XX
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2
Offered for MTech, MTech-PhD Type Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of polymeric materials
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Impart knowledge about the current status as well as advancements for electronic
packaging of devices along with process details and their relevance to Chemical
Engineers. Empower scholars to pursue further career and self-learning in this area.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the knowledge about:
1. Various types of packages, levels of packaging and overall processes relevant to
packaging starting from assembly to reliability.
2. Detailed know-how about the chemical manufacturing processes relevant to Electronic
Packaging of devices.
Contents
Introduction to Electronic Packaging: Definitions, Need for Electronic Packaging, Levels of
packaging, Types of packages, Introduction to Device generations, Introduction to device
manufacturing process, Case studies, DFM, DFR, DFT (5 Lectures)
Flip Chip Packaging: History and details of process flow for flip-chip technology, Polymers for
flip-chip technology (6 Lectures)
Advanced Packaging: Substrate manufacturing technology, Embedded die technology, core-
less technology, wafer and panel level packaging, Polymers for Advanced Packaging,
subtractive process, semi-additive process, additive process (12 Lectures)
Surface Mount Technology: BGA, LGA, PGA, SMT failures, Lead-free solder (3 Lectures)
Thermal Management: Need for thermal management, Heat Sinks, Novel thermal
management technologies, Passives (6 Lectures)
Electronic Package Reliability: Thermal reliability, Mechanical reliability, Moisture sensitivity
test, Pre-conditioning, Chemical resistance, Electrical reliability, HAST, B-HAST (10
Lectures)
Laboratory Experiments (28)
Shear-rheology of polymer dielectric for lamination processes1
Shear-rheology of polymer dielectric for lamination processes2
Structural analysis for polymer dielectrics for SEM1
Structural analysis for polymer dielectrics for SEM2
Structural analysis for polymer dielectrics for reliability via AFM1
Structural analysis for polymer dielectrics for reliability via AFM2
SEM analysis of mobile chip 1/SEM analysis of a mobile chip 2/SEM analysis of a mobile chip 3
SEM analysis of a television chip/ SEM analysis of a Air Conditioner chip
SEM analysis of an old generation chip (pre 1990s)
Textbook
1. Khandpur R. S., (2005), Printed Circuit Boards Design, Fabrication, Assembly and
Testing, Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited India
Reference Books
1. Tummala R., (2019), Fundamentals of Device and Systems Packaging: Technologies
and Applications, McGraw Hill
Online Course Material
1. Bhattacharya A, Electronic Packaging & Manufacturing, NPTEL Course Material, Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112105267/
Mahesh G V, An Introduction to Electronics Systems Packaging, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Electrical Engineering, IISc Bengaluru,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108108031/
20
Title Nanocomposite Membrane Technology Number CHL8XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Ph.D. Type Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Engineering and
Chemistry
Objective
The instructor will provide:
1. Fundamentals, synthesis and characterisation of nanocomposite membrane,
2. Different applications of nanocomposite membrane technology.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. Comprehensive knowledge of fundamentals, synthesis and characterisation of
nanocomposite membrane technology.
2. Its applications in different fields such as water treatment, gas separation etc.
3. Challenges and opportunities.
Contents
Introduction to nanocomposite membrane technology: Membrane types, membrane
processes, transport theories. (8 Lectures)
Synthesis of nanocomposite membranes: Preparation techniques, homogeneous membranes,
composite membranes, raw materials, processing methods. (6 Lectures)
Characterisation of nanocomposite membranes: Pore size, micrographic methods,
spectroscopic methods, strength measurements. (6 Lectures)
Nanocomposite membranes in water treatment: Conventional nanocomposites, thin film
nanocomposites, TFC with nanocomposite substrate. (7 Lectures)
Nanocomposite membranes in gas separation. (5 Lectures)
Challenges in processing of nanocomposite membranes. (5 Lectures)
Environment and safety issues. (5 Lectures)
Text Book
1. Tewari, P.K., (2016), Nanocomposite Membrane Technology: Fundamentals and
Applications, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group.
Reference book
1. Baker, R.W., (2004), Membrane Technology and Applications, 2nd Edition, Membrane
Technology and Research Inc., Menlo Park, CA.
Online Course Material
1. Mohanty, K., Membrane Technology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical
Engineering, IIT Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103163/
21
Title Artificial Intelligence-1 Number CSXXXX
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI, with some of them
being covered in depth
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used
Contents
Introduction (1 lecture)
Propositional logic (8 lectures)
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* search, heuristic
functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, Alpha-beta pruning) (10
lectures)
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures)
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures)
Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures)
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures)
Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer theory,
Fuzzy logic (6 lectures)
Textbook
1. Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,
Prentice Hall
Reference Books
1. Research literature
Self-Learning Material
1. Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,
http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F
2. NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/
22
Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSXXXX
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [c] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory
Prerequisite None
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning in
today’s world
2. Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work on
problems relating to Machine Learning
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications
Contents
(fractal 1) Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic
regression (2 lectures)
Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)
Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick,
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD and
Backpropagation (3 lectures)
(fractal 2) Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral
clustering (2 lectures)
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed
sensing (2 lectures)
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis,
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (4 lectures)
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning
(3 lectures)
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (3 lectures)
(fractal 3) Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias-
complexity tradeoff, No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization,
Adaboost (7 lectures)
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)
Textbook
1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to
Algorithms, Cambridge University Press
Reference Books
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill
Self Learning Material
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229
23
Title Introduction to Internet of Things (IoT) Number EEL7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1]
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide overview of applications of IoT and relevant technologies
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Identify and integrate different components required for IoT applications
Contents
Introduction to IoT: Sensing, Actuation, Basics of IoT Networking (2 Lectures)
IoT Architecture, Communication Protocols for IoT (2 Lectures)
Sensor Networks: Wireless Sensor Network, Sensor nodes (2 Lectures)
Machine to machine Communication: Introduction, Node types and M2M Applications,
Integration of Sensors and Actuators for Implementation of IoT (4 Lectures)
Introduction to Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing, Smart cities and Smart homes, Industrial IoT
(4 Lectures)
Textbook
1. Kamal, R., (2017), Internet of Things - Architecture and Design Principles, 1st Edition,
Mcgraw Hill.
Preparatory Course Material
1. Misra, S., Introduction to Internet of Things, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105166/
24
Title Nanosensors Number MEL7XX0
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech and PhD Type Open Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide understanding about importance of nanoscale materials for sensing applications.
2. Teach approaches for fabrication and characterizing of sensors based on nanomaterials.
3. Enhance critical, creative and innovative thinking to tailor nanomaterials for specific application.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Design and fabricate nanomaterial based sensors.
2. Undertake interdisciplinary research and exploit nanomaterials for new sensing applications.
Contents
Sensor types: Displacement, position and proximity sensors (3 lectures); velocity, motion, force
and pressure sensors (4 lectures); components and classification of sensors (1 lecture);
parameters for sensor characterization (1 lecture); sensor arrays (1 lecture).
Nanostructures and Nanoparticles: Nanostructures (1 lectures); nanostructure fabrication (top
down and bottom up approach) (3 lectures); characterization of nanostructures using different
techniques (Atomic Force Microscopy, Scanning Electron Microscopy, Tunneling Electron
Microscopy) (3 lectures); nanoparticles (types and shapes) (1 lecture); nanoparticle
production, shape control, functionalization and application (2 lectures); nanowires (properties,
sensing mechanism, fabrication, and devices) (4 lectures); quantum dots (1 lecture).
Carbon nanotubes/nanofibres (CNT/CNF) and other Nanosensors: CNT structure, properties,
synthesis, functionalization (3 lectures); CNT/CNF based sensors (single layer/multi-layer) (2
lectures); nanostructure, nanoparticles, nanowire and nanofibre based metal oxide sensors (3
lectures); flexible sensors and electronic skin (2 lectures); Nanosensors in engineering
applications: optical, chemical, mechanical, electrochemical, mass sensitive, biosensors,
mechanical sensors in liquid solution, thin film sensors (7 lectures).
Reference Books:
1. Khanna, V. K., (2011), Nanosensors: Physical, Chemical, and Biological, CRC Press.
2. Atta, N. F., (2014), Nanosensors: Materials and Technologies. IFSA Publishing.
3. Meyyappan, M., (2004), Carbon Nanotubes: Science and Applications, 1st Edition, CRC
Press.
Self Learning Material
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112108092
2. https://www.coursera.org/learn/nanotechnology/home
25
Title Additive Manufacturing Number MEL7XX0
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for Type Program Elective
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. cover scientific as well as technological aspects of various additive, subtractive and
formative rapid manufacturing processes.
2. cover wide range of contemporary methodologies/technologies and tools for rapid
manufacturing.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. appreciate process flow and working principles for various additive manufacturing
processes
2. deal with challenges faced during additive manufacturing of components
Contents
1. Introduction: Mass production and customization, Classification of processes, process
chain for AM (4 Lectures)
2. Data Preparation: Data formats, data conversion, data validity checks, data repair (4
Lectures)
3. Process Planning Stage: Slicing Algorithms, Part Depositions and Orientation, Direct
Slicing, STEP related details (6 Lectures)
4. AM Processes: FDM of polymers, metals and ceramics, Laminated Object manufacturing,
Shaped Deposition manufacturing, Sterolithography and liquid based systems, Laser
Sintering technologies, 3-D Printing, Direct Metal Deposition, Electron and Laser beam
technologies, Subtractive and Formative Rapid manufacturing processes (14 Lectures)
5. Rapid Tooling (2 Lectures)
6. Hybrid Processes (4 Lectures)
7. Process Selection, Applications, Capabilities and Challenges (8 Lectures)
Reference Books
1. Gibson, I, Rosen, D W, and Stucker, B, Additive Manufacturing Methodologies: Rapid
Prototyping to Direct Digital Manufacturing, Springer
2. Hopkinson, N, Haque, R, and Dickens, P, Rapid Manufacturing: An Industrial Revolution
for a DigitalAge: An Industrial Revolution for the Digital Age, Wiley
3. Bartolo,P J (editor),Virtual and Rapid Manufacturing: Advanced Research in Virtual and
Rapid Prototyping, Taylor and Francis
4. Chua, C K, Leong, K F, Lim C S, Rapid Prototyping, World Scientific
Online Course Material:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/112104156/
26
Title Robotics Number MEL7XX0
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for B. Tech (ME), M. Tech(AMD) and PhD Type Program Core
Prerequisite
Objectives
1. To introduce fundamental aspects of modeling and control of robot manipulators.
2. To provide a brief of results from geometry, kinematics, dynamics, motion planning and
control
Learning Outcomes
1. The course will equip students with theoretical and practical knowledge of robot modeling,
programming and control.
Contents: Fractal 1: Robot Modeling [MEL7XX1] [1-0-0]
1. Rotational Transformations, Composition of Rotations, Parameterizations of Rotations,
Rigid Motions, Homogeneous Transformations (2 lectures)
2. Forward and Inverse Kinematics – Kinematic Chains, Forward Kinematics: The Denavit-
Hartenberg Convention, Inverse Kinematics, Kinematic Decoupling (4 lectures)
3. Velocity Kinematics – The Jacobian: Angular and Linear Velocity: The General Case,
Derivation of the Jacobian, Analytical Jacobian, Singularities, Inverse Velocity and
Acceleration (4 lectures)
4. Robot Dynamics: Equations of Motion, Kinetic and Potential Energy, Euler-Lagrange
Equations, Properties of Robot Dynamic Equations, Recursive Newton-Euler Formulation (4
lectures)
Fractal 2: Motion Planning and Programming [MEL7XX2] [1-0-0]
1. Path and Trajectory Planning: Path vs. Trajectory, The Configuration Space, Path Planning
Using Configuration Space, Potential Fields, Trajectory Planning, Point To Point Motion,
Paths Specified by Via Points, Probabilistic Roadmap Planner (5 lectures)
2. Vision-Based Control: The Geometry of Image Formation, Camera Calibration, Camera
Motion and Interaction Matrix, Image-Based Control Laws, Relation between End Effector
and Camera Motions, Partitioned Approaches (4 lectures)
3. Robot Operating System (ROS): Basic ROS concepts, Writing RoS Programs, Log Messages,
Graph Resource Name, Launch Files, Parameters, Services, Recording and Replaying
Services (5 lectures)
Fractal 3: Robot Control[MEL7XX3] [1-0-0]
1. Sensors and Actuators: Joint Actuating Systems, Drives, Proprioceptive Sensors,
Exteroceptive Sensors (3 lectures)
2. Linear Control: Feedback and closed-loop control, second-order linear systems, control of
second-order systems, Control-law partitioning, trajectory-following control, disturbance
rejection, continuous vs. Discrete time control, modeling and control of a single joint,
architecture of an industrial-robot controller (3 lectures)
3. Nonlinear control: Nonlinear and time-varying systems, multi-input, multi-output control
systems, control of manipulators, practical considerations, current industrial-robot control
systems, lyapunov stability analysis, cartesian-based control systems, adaptive control (4
lectures)
4. Force Control: Interaction with Environment, Compliance Control, Impedance Control,
Force Control, Hybrid Force/Motion control (4 lectures)
Laboratory Classes (12 exercises)
DH Parameters, Forward and Inverse Kinematics of Robot, Robot Trajectory Planning,
Robot Operating System (ROS), Control of Robot through ROS, Path Planning, Vision Based
control, Force Control
Reference Books
1. Saha S. K., Introduction to robotics. Tata McGraw-Hill Education
2. Spong M. W., Hutchinson, S., and Vidyasagar, M., Robot modeling and control. New York:
Wiley.
3. O'Kane J. M., A Gentle Introduction to ROS, ISBN 978-1492143239
4. Craig J. J, Introduction to robotics: mechanics and control. Pearson/Prentice Hall.
Self Learning Material
1. https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS223A
27
Title Sensors and IoT Lab Number EEP7XX0
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1]
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory
Prerequisite
Objective
1. To introduce students with sensors fabrication
2. To familiarize students with measurement instruments like Spectrum and Vector Network
Analyzer
3. To introduce students with various kits and components required for IoT applications
Learning Outcomes
1. Familiarization with sensor fabrication process and characterization
2. Handling high frequency measurement instruments
3. Implementation of various circuits required to build a transceiver
Contents
The lab course will be dependent on the various core and elective components of the program.
There will be a scope for modifying the contents depending on the recent developments in
technology. Experiments from some of the following topics will be part of this lab.
• Implementation of Signal Conditioning Circuits
• Implementation of IoT components using Hardware/Software
• Sensor interfacing using off-the-shelf components
• Sensor Design, Fabrication and Characterization (Part of this in winter internship)
• RF components characterization; Antennas and RF amplifiers
• Implementation of real time examples of IoT using Embedded Systems
• Selected experiments from Communication Systems
• Recent topics of interest
28
Title Industry 4.0 Applications in
Manufacturing Systems
Number MEL7XX0
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 1-0-0 [1]
Offered for Type Program Core
Prerequisite
Objectives:
The Instructor will:
1. provide brief understanding about Industry 4.0 concepts in manufacturing systems
Learning Outcomes:
The students are expected to appreciate:
1. current trends at system level in manufacturing organizations
2. the importance of industry 4.0 concepts at manufacturing systems
Contents:
Introduction to Manufacturing systems (2 Lecture)
Automated Manufcturing Systems: Concept of Group Technology and cellular
manufacturing, Flexible Manufacturing Systems, Lean Manufacturing, Agile Manufacturing
(6 Lectures)
Industry 4.0 for Manufacturing Systems: Agent Based Manufacturing, Cloud Based
Manufacturing (6 Lectures)
Reference Books:
1. Talavage J., and Hanman R. G, Flexible Manufacturing Systems in Practice, Taylor and
Francis
2. Gunasekaran A., Agile Manufacturing: 21st Century Competitive Strategy, Elsevier
3. Wang L., and Vincent W. X., Cloud Based Cyber-Physical Systems in Manufacturing,
Springer
Self-Learning Material:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105195/10
29
Group 2: Reactive Chemical Processing
Title Molecular Modelling of Catalytic
Reactions
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Program Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical Kinetics
Objectives:
The Instructor will:
1. Provide the knowledge in experimental and theoretical aspects of catalytic reactions,
with primary emphasis on understanding of reaction mechanisms.
2. Introduce interesting recent trends in research and development of a heterogeneous
catalyst, in which experimental results are inferred by quantum mechanical
simulations, so as to develop a molecular level understanding of the catalytic
reactions.
Learning Outcomes:
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand the experimental and theoretical aspects of catalytic reactions and recent
trends in research and development of a heterogeneous catalyst, in which
experimental results are inferred by quantum mechanical simulations.
2. Develop a molecular level understanding of the catalytic reactions.
Contents:
Principles of Molecular Heterogeneous Catalysis: Sabatier principle, Catalytic Cycle, Transition
State Theory, Ensemble Effect, Defect Sites, Cluster-Size Effects, Metal-support
Interactions, Structural Effects, Quantum Size Effects, Electron Transfer Effects, Bronsted-
Evans-Polanyi Relations, Reactivity of Transition-Metal Surfaces. (8 lectures)
Kinetics of Catalytic Reactions: Adsorption, Desorption and Surface Reactions, Reaction on
Uniform and Non-Uniform Surfaces, Structure Sensitive and Non-Sensitive reactions on
Metals. (4 lectures)
Chemisorption & Quantum Chem: Chemical Bond, Bonding to Transition Metals,
Chemisorption. (8 lectures)
Introduction to Density Functional Theory: Born–Oppenheimer approximation, Hartree-Fock
Theory, Self-Consistent Field, Kohn-Sham Density Functional Theory, Bloch’s Theorem
and Plane Wave Basis Set. (6 lectures)
Computational Methods: Electronic Structure Methods, Potential Energy Surface, Exchange-
Correlation Functional, Pseudo-Potential, Search for Transition State, Dimer Method,
Nudged Elastic Band Method, Density of States. (8 lectures)
Molecular Modelling: Catalysis by Metals, Oxides, Sulfides and Zeolites. Aqueous Phase
Heterogeneous Catalysis and Electrocatalysis. (8 lectures)
Text Book
1. Rutger A. van Santen, Matthew Neurock, Molecular Heterogeneous Catalysis: A
Conceptual and Computational Approach, 1st edition (March 10, 2006), Wiley-VCH,
ISBN: 978-3-527-29662-0
Reference Books
1. Chorkendorff, J. W. Niemantsverdriet, 2007, Concepts of Modern Catalysis and
Kinetics, Wiley VCH, 2nd edition (22 August 2007), ISBN: 978-3527316724
2. David Sholl, Janice A Stecke, 2009, Density Functional Theory: A Practical
Introduction, Wiley-Interscience; 1 edition (April 13, 2009), ISBN: 978-0470373170
30
3. M. Albert Vannice,2005, Kinetics of Catalytic Reactions, Springer; 2005 edition
(August 24, 2005)
4. Wolfram Koch, Max C. Holthausen, 2001, A Chemist's Guide to Density Functional
Theory, Wiley-VCH; 2 edition (July 11, 2001), ISBN: 978-3527303724
5. Michel Boudart, 1984, Kinetics of Heterogeneous Catalytic Reactions, Princeton
University Press (1984), ISBN: 978-0691083476
31
Title Heterogeneous Catalysis and
Catalytic Reactors
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual
Degree
Type Programme Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical
Kinetics
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Impart knowledge about the basic concepts, detailed structures, preparation methods
and reactivities of solid catalysts, its properties and relationship between the
structures and reactivities.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand and gain knowledge of the detailed structures, preparation methods and
reactivities of solid catalysts, its properties and relationship between the structures
and reactivities.
Contents
Introduction to basic concepts (2 lectures)
Catalysis: Acid-base catalysis, application of catalyst functionality concepts for control of
reaction selectivity and kinetic models, Properties of catalysts, reaction selectivity and
kinetic models (10 lectures)
Steps in catalytic reaction: Adsorption, Kinetic models, intraparticle transport process,
Selection and design of catalysts, Preparation and characterization of catalysts, Catalyst
deactivation, various deactivation models, Optimal distribution of catalyst in a pellet (14
lectures)
Zeolites: Preparation and characterization of various Zeolite catalysts and their application
(4 lectures)
Commercial Reactors and catalysts: Adiabatic, fluidized bed, trickle bed, slurry; industrially
important catalysts, Environmental catalysis (8 lectures)
Design of Catalytic Reactors for gas and two phase systems, Design of polymeric reactors. (4
lectures)
Text Books
1. Sharma M.M. and Doraiswamy, Heterogeneous Reactions, Vol 1 and Vol II
2. Thomas, J.M., Thomas W.J., Principles and practice of heterogeneous Catalysis.
Reference Books
1. Bruce Gates , Catalytic Chemistry.
2. Morbidelli and Verma , Optimal distribution of catalyst in a pellet.
3. Ford M.E. and Marcel Dekker, Catalysis of Organic reactions.
Online Course Material
1. Pant, K.K., Heterogeneous Catalysis and Catalytic Processes, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Delhi,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/102/103102012/
32
Title Characterization of Multiphase
Reactors
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme
Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical Kinetics
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Impart knowledge of modern characterization techniques useful for reaction
engineering R&D and operation of chemical plants.
2. Introduce the students to analytical techniques, catalyst characterization techniques,
and flow characterization techniques.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Have the understanding and knowledge of modern characterization techniques useful
for reaction engineering R&D and operation of chemical plants.
2. Apply the analytical techniques, catalyst characterization techniques, flow
characterization techniques, in real systems.
Contents
Characterization in Chemical Reaction Engineering: Introduction, Data Analysis and
presentation, Data reporting methods, principles of measurement techniques (7 lectures)
Catalyst preparation and characterization: Principle of catalyst characterisation, determination
of surface area and pore volume, pore size distribution of the catalyst, Understanding the
surface morphologies and Chemical analysis of the catalyst (14 lectures)
Flow characterization in multiphase reactors: Introduction, Intrusive vs. Non-intrusive
measurements, Pressure probes and voidage probes, data analysis and demonstration,
Velocity measurement methods and demonstration (14 lectures)
Tomography methods: Introduction, gamma-ray tomography, electrical capacitance/
resistance tomography and demonstration (4 lectures)
Measurement of mass and heat transfer coefficients and demonstration (3 lectures)
Text Book
1. Chaouki, J., Larachi, F., & Dudukovic, M. P. (Eds.). (1997). Non-invasive monitoring of
multiphase. Elsevier.
Reference Book
1. Perry’s Chemical Engineer’s Handbook 8th Edition
33
Title Advanced Wastewater Treatment Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective
Prerequisite None
Objective
The instructor will:
1 Impart comprehensive knowledge of industrial and municipal wastewater.
2. Discuss mechanism and methodologies for waste water treatment.
3. Discuss case studies
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the:
1 Comprehensive knowledge of the wastewater treatment.
2. Knowledge of advanced methodologies such as wastewater management, recycle and
reuse.
Contents
Introduction: Waste water engineering: an overview, characterisation of wastewater and
monitoring of industrial and municipal wastewater, emerging contaminants, environmental
impacts of wastewater constituents. (4 lectures)
Conventional Water/ Wastewater Treatment: Existing unit operations and processes, basic
philosophy of water and wastewater treatment plants; physio-chemical treatment
methods: (i) Screening, (ii) conventional filtration (iii) coagulation, (iv) flocculation, (v)
floatation (vi) Clari-flocculation (vii) sedimentation, (viii) sand filtration, etc. (10 lectures)
Aerobic and Anaerobic Suspended and Attached Growth Wastewater Treatment Processes:
Aerated lagoon, activated sludge systems, trickling filter, sequential batch reactor, fluidized
bed bioreactors, Up-flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) and hybrid Up-flow Anaerobic
Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactors. (8 lectures)
Advanced Treatment Processes: Membrane Filtration, microfiltration, ultrafiltration,
nanofiltration, reverse osmosis and electrodialysis; wet air oxidation, adsorption and ion-
exchange; wet-land and root-zone treatment of industrial and municipal wastes; design of
sludge drying beds, thermal and biological processes for sludge and land fillings. membrane
reactors, new technologies for wastewater disinfection. (12 lectures)
Water Recycling and Reuse: Different unit operations for water recycling depending on end
use, energy considerations, recovery of valuables from wastewater, zero liquid discharge
(ZLD). (8 lectures)
Waste Water Treatment Design Lab (28 hrs)
Clarifier
Aerator
Sand filtration system
Municipal waste water system
Grey water treatment system
Sewage water treatment system
Industrial waste water systems
Pond water treatment
Text Book
1. Burton F.L., Tchobanoglous G., Stensel H.D., 2017, Waste Water Engineering Treatment
and Reuse, 4thed.,Tata McGraw-Hill.
2. Arceivala S.J. and Asolekar S.R., 2007, Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control and
Reuse, 3rd Ed., Tata McGraw Hill.
Reference Books
1. Henze M., van-Loosdrecht M.C.M., Ekama G.A. and Brdjanovic D., 2008, Biological
Wastewater Treatment: Principles, Modelling and Design, IWA publishing.
2. Sincero A.P. and Sincero G.A., 1996, Environmental Engineering – A Design Approach,
Prentice-Hall.
Online Course Material
1. Tiwari M K, Wastewater treatment and recycling, NPTEL course material, Department of
Civil Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105178/
34
Title Chemical Reactor Analysis Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical Kinetics
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge of reaction kinetics and chemical reactors.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Have comprehensive knowledge of reaction kinetics and chemical reactors.
Contents
Introduction: Review of design of ideal isothermal homogeneous reactors for single reaction. (3
lectures)
Reactor design: Design of ideal isothermal reactors for multiple reactions. Definition of
Residence time distribution (RTD), interpretation of the data, Flow models for non-ideal
reactors – axial dispersion, N-tanks in series, and multi-parameter models, reactor
diagnosis, influence of RTD and micro-mixing on conversion. (14 lectures)
Reactor operation: Adiabatic operations and non-adiabatic, optimal temperature, progression,
hot spot in tubular reactor, auto-thermal operation and steady state multiplicity in
continuously stirred tank reactor (CSTR) and tubular reactors, introduction to bifurcation
theory. (13 lectures)
Multiphase catalytic reactors: Introduction, effectiveness factor, selectivity, catalyst
deactivation, use of pseudo-homogeneous models for design of heterogeneous catalytic
reactors (fixed and fluidized beds), Gas-liquid-solid reactors, hydrodynamics and design of
bubble column, slurry and trickle-bed reactors. (12 lectures)
Design and Analysis Lab (28 hrs)
Design of isothermal reactors (2)
Residence time distribution (2)
Multiphase reactors (2)
Design method of different columns (2)
Continuously stirred tank reactor (4)
Tubular reactor (4)
Batch reactor (4)
Plug flow reactor (4)
Laminar floe reactor (4)
Text Books
1. Froment G.F. and Bischoff K.B., 1990, Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, 2nd Ed.,
Wiley.
2. Fogler H.S., 2006, Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering, 4th Ed., Prentice-Hall.
3. Levenspiel O., 1999, Chemical Reaction Engineering, 3rd Ed., Wiley.
Reference Books
1. Doraiswamy L.K. and Sharma M.M., “Heterogeneous Reactions Analysis. Vol. 1: Gas-
Solid and Solid-Solid Reactions”, Wiley.
2. Doraiswamy L.K. and Sharma M.M., “Heterogeneous Reactions Analysis. Vol. 2: Gas-
Solid and Solid-Solid Reactions”, Wiley.
35
Title Selected Topics in Reactive Chemical
Processing
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech. / M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective
Prerequisite To be declared by the instructor
Objective
The instructor will provide:
1. In-depth coverage on specific topics within the reaction engineering domain, as
determined by the instructor(s) and declared to students before or at the time of
registration.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. the in-depth knowledge in specific topic within the reaction engineering domain.
Contents
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor.
Textbook
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
Reference Books
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
36
Title Recent Advances in Reactive
Chemical Processing
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-0 (2)
Offered for M.Tech./ M.Tech.- Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective
Prerequisite To be declared by instructor
Objective
The instructor will provide:
1. Focussed and modular coverage on multiple topics of current interest in Reaction
Engineering. The topics to be covered will depend on the instructor, but will relate to
advanced research level material.
(To be taken by students specifically interested in the corresponding areas of
research.)
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have
1. the in-depth insight in the corresponding area of research.
Contents
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor.
Textbook
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
Reference Books
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
37
Title Current Topics in Reactive
Chemical Processing
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical
Engineering
L-T-P (C) 1-0-0 (1)
Offered for M.Tech. / M.Tech.- Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective
Prerequisite To be declared by the instructor
Objective
The instructor will provide:
2. In-depth coverage on current topics in the area of reaction engineering, as
determined by the instructor(s) and declared to students before or at the time of
registration.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
2. the in-depth knowledge in specific topic in the field of reaction engineering and
apply the knowledge in the field of reaction engineering to specific areas of
research.
Contents
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor.
Textbook
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
Reference Books
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
38
Group 3: Petroleum and Petrochemicals
Title Petroleum Refinery Engineering Number CHL7XX
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective
Prerequisite Knowledge of Mass Transfer
Objective
The Instructor will provide:
1. Thorough understanding in the area of petroleum oil processing and new trends in
refinery operations.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. comprehensive knowledge of petroleum oil processing and new trends in refinery
operations.
Contents
Prelude to Petroleum Refinery Engineering: Composition of petroleum, range of refinery
products (6 lectures)
Processes in Petroleum Refinery Engineering: Catalytic cracking, Delayed coking,
hydrogenation and hydrocracking, Isomerization, Alkylation and Polymerization, Pyrolysis
of Naptha and light hydrocarbons (14 lectures)
Design in Petroleum Refinery Engineering: Design of crude oil distillation column, Furnace
design (12 lectures)
Lube oil manufacturing (4 lectures)
Energy conservation and new trends in petroleum refinery operations (6 lectures)
Design Lab (28 hours)
Crude Oil Distillation Column Design
Components Design
Catalytic cracking unit
Furnace Design
Problem on energy conservation
Waste heat utilization
Efficiency enhancement
Pollution reduction
Wealth from waste
Recycling and reuse
Textbook
1. Nelson, Wilbur L. (1958), Petroleum refining engineering, McGraw-Hill, New York
Reference Books
1. Watkins, Robert N. (1979) Petroleum refinery distillation, Gulf Publishing Company,
Book Division, Houston TX
2. Meyers, Robert Allen, and Robert Allen Meyers, (2004) Handbook of petroleum
refining processes, New York: McGraw-Hill
3. Speight, James G., and BakiOzum (2001) Petroleum refining processes. CRC Press
4. Edmister, Wc, and B. I. Lee, (1961) Applied Hydrocarbon Thermodynamics, Gulf Pub.
Co.,Houston
5. Daubert, T. E., and R. P. Danner. API technical data book-petroleum refining.
American Petroleum Institute (API), Washington DC (1997)
Online Course Material
1. Pant, K.K. and Kunzru, D., Petroleum Refinery Engineering, NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Delhi and Department of Chemical
Engineering, IIT Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/102/103102022/
39
Title Petrochemical Technology Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme
Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical Engineering
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide comprehensive knowledge and understanding in the area of petrochemicals
and new trends in petrochemical industries.
2. Focus on the conventional processes in downstream petrochemical industries,
particularly oil derivatives, polymers, materials, detergents and synthesis gas
derivatives. New innovations in the petrochemicals sector will be highlighted.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. good understanding of petrochemicals and new trends in petrochemical industries, as
well as conventional processes in downstream petrochemical industries, particularly
oil derivatives, polymers, materials, detergents and synthesis gas derivatives.
Contents
Introduction: Composition of petroleum, laboratory tests, refinery products. (5 lectures)
Petrochemical industries: Indian Scenario. (1 lecture)
Feed stocks for petrochemical Industries. (2 lectures)
Introduction to Catalytic cracking, Catalytic reforming, Delayed coking, Hydrogenation
and Hydrocracking, Isomerization, Alkylation and Polymerization. (4 lectures)
Purification of gases, Separation of aromatics by various Techniques. (4 lectures)
Petrochemicals from Methane. (2 lectures)
Petrochemicals from Ethane – Ethylenes – Acetylene. (3 lectures)
Petrochemicals from C3, C4 and higher Hydrocarbons. (3 lectures)
Synthetic Gas Chemicals. (1 lectures)
Polymers from Olefins. (5 lectures)
Petroleum Aromatics. (3 lectures)
Synthetic Fibers, Rubber , Plastics and Synthetic Detergents. (3 lectures)
Energy conservation in petrochemical Industries. (1 lecture)
Pollution control in Petrochemical Industries. (2 lectures)
New Trends in petrochemical Industry. (1 lecture)
Planning and commissioning of a petrochemicals complex. (2 lectures)
Text Books
1. Hatch, Lewis Frederic, and Sami Matar, 1981, From hydrocarbons to petrochemicals,
Gulf Publishing Company, Book Division, 1981.
2. Meyers, Robert, and Robert Allen Meyers, eds., 2005, Handbook of petrochemicals
production processes. McGraw-Hill.
Reference Books
1. Spitz, Peter H. Petrochemicals: the rise of an industry. New York: Wiley, 1988.
2. Articles related to new trends in Petrochemical Industries published in various
Chemical Engineering journals.
40
Title Petroleum Production Engineering Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical
Engineering Concepts
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth understanding of oil production engineering concepts, well drilling,
well completions, artificial lift mechanism, how to find a non-performing well in a
reservoir, finding the remedy using well logging and well stimulation.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to:
1. Have understanding of oil production engineering concepts, well drilling, well
completions, artificial lift mechanism, finding a non-performing well in a reservoir,
finding the remedy using well logging and well stimulation.
Contents
Introduction to oil reservoirs. (3 Lectures)
Basic reservoir engineering concepts (porosity, permeability, darcy’s law) (3 Lectures)
Different drive mechanisms of reservoir, different artificial lifts used in the wells. (4
Lectures)
Basic concepts of production engineering (tests run in wells to evaluate performance,
parameters defining flow in a well). (5 Lectures)
IPR (inflow performance curve), VLP (vertical lift performance), Vogel equation, flow in pipe.
(5 Lectures)
Well analysis tools (4 Lectures)
Problem identification and remediation in well. (6 Lectures)
Logging and well stimulation techniques. (6 Lectures)
Production well simulation or Sand control and horizontal wells. (6 Lectures)
Text Book
Michael J. Economides, A. Daniel Hill and Christine Ehlig-Economides, Petroleum Production
System, PTR Prentice Hall, Inc, New Jersey, 1994.
41
Title Petroleum Reservoir
Engineering
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective
Prerequisite Basic Knowledge of Chemical
Engineering Concepts
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth understanding of petroleum reservoir engineering from basic model
to production forecast.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to:
1. Have the knowledge of petroleum reservoir engineering, recovery mechanism and
reservoir simulation.
Contents
Introduction of oil reservoirs/ static model and dynamic model. (2 lectures)
Rock properties: porosity, permeability, compressibility, wettability, capillary pressure,
relative permeability, building a reservoir description. (6 lectures)
Fluid properties: formation volume factor, gas oil ratio, viscosity, tests for oil
characterization. (6 lectures)
Oil in place numbers, definition of reserves, resources, different methods of reserves
estimation, material balance for hydrocarbon reservoirs (3 lectures)
Pressure transient analysis. (4 lectures)
Recovery mechanisms 1. Primary: solution gas drive, gas cap drive, water drive. (4
lectures)
Recovery mechanisms 2. Secondary: gas injection, water flooding, Buckley-Leverett
theory. (4 lectures)
Recovery mechanisms 3. Tertiary recovery: chemical methods, thermal methods. (4
lectures)
Production forecasts. (4 lectures)
Reservoir simulations. (5 lectures)
Text Book
1. Dake, L.P., 2020, Fundamentals of reservoir engineering, (Reprint edition), Elsevier.
Reference Books
1. Larry, W. Lake, 1996, Enhanced Oil Recovery, Prentice Hall
2. Buckley, S. E. and Leverett, M. C., 1942, Mechanism of fluid displacement in sands,
Trans. AIME, 146, 107-116
42
Title Process Safety & Hazards Number CHL7XX
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual
Degree
Type Programme Elective
Prerequisite Basic Knowledge of Chemical
Engineering
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide comprehensive knowledge of safety regulations and their practices,
chemical plant hazards and their control, risk assessment and management
principles and techniques and accident analysis.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Identify and distinguish typical sources of risk and hazard in a process plant,
undertake hazard and operability (HAZOP) study.
Contents
Safety in Industries: Concepts and definition, storage of dangerous materials, Plant layout
Safety systems, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) incidence rate,
Fatal accident rate (FAR), Measures to take during accidents, Toxicology (10 lectures)
Industrial Hygiene: Government regulations, Industrial hygiene and safety aspects related
to
toxicity, noise, pressure, temperature, vibrations, radiation etc, Evaluation Methods,
Evaluating workers Exposures to dusts, noise. (8 lectures)
Selection Mechanism: Technology and process selection, Scale of disaster, Fire triangle
Ignition, Confined and unconfined explosion, Vapors cloud explosions, Boiling liquid
expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE), Dust explosion, shock wave, Flammability
characteristics of liquids and vapors, Minimum oxygen concentration (MOC) and
Inerting.
(8 lectures)
Handling Chemicals and toxicity: Control of toxic chemicals, Storage and handling of
flammable and toxic chemical, Runway reactions, Relief system risk and hazards
management, Design to prevent Fires and Explosions, Miscellaneous Design for
preventing Fires and Explosion. (8 lectures)
Hazards Identification: checklists, Surveys, Hazard and Operability Studies (HAZOP),
Safety
reviews. Risk Assessment, Hazard models and risk data. Tackling disasters, plan for
emergency. Risk management routines, Emergency shutdown systems, Role of
computers in safety, Prevention of hazard human element, Technology and process
selection. (8 lectures)
Text Books
1. Daniel A. Crowl and Joseph F. Louvar, 1990, Chemical Process Safety:
Fundamentals with applications, Prentice Hall, Inc.
2. Lee, F.P., 1983, Loss prevention in the process Industries, Volume 1 and 2
Butterworth.
3. Hoboken, N. J., 2000, Guidelines for Chemical Process Quantitative Risk Analysis,
Wiley-Interscience.
Reference Books
1. R. W. King and J. Magid, Industrial Hazards and Safety Handbook, Butterworth,
1982.
2. G. L. Wells, Safety in Process Plant Design, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1980.
3. Fawcett, H.H. and W.S. Wood, Safety and Accident Prevention in Chemical
Operations, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1982.
Online Course Material
1. Sinha, S., Chemical Process Safety, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical
Engineering IIT Roorkee, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/107/103107156/
43
Title Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Number CHL7XX0
Department (i) Chemical Engineering, (ii) Civil and
Infrastructure Engineering
L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective
Prerequisite
Objective
The instructor will:
1. Impart the knowledge to the students with the methods of assessment of
environmental impacts due to developmental and industrial activities.
2. Expose the students with the EIA regulations and EMP.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the:
1. In-depth knowledge of the methods of assessment of environmental impacts due
to developmental and industrial activities.
2. In-depth knowledge of EIA regulations and EMP.
Contents
Introduction to EIA; definitions and concepts; evolution of EIA; historical development of
EIA; forecasting environmental changes; strategic environmental assessment; water
sensitive environment; ISO provisions; environmental clearance procedure. (11 lectures)
EIA documentation and processes; preliminary stages of EIA; project types and screening;
impact prediction; evaluation and mitigation; EIA monitoring and auditing. (11 lectures)
EIA regulations; TOR for EIAs; environmental indices; environmental legislation; EIA at
regional level, sectoral level, and policy level; sustainable development; Environmental
Management Plan (EMP). (11 lectures)
Future strategies and EIA case studies. (9 lectures)
Text Book
1. Canter, L., Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw Hill, New York, 1996.
Reference Books
1. World Bank, ‘Environmental Assessment Source Book’, Environment Dept.,
Washington D.C., 1991.
2. Rau, G.J. and Wooten, C.D., Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook, McGraw Hill,
New York, 1980. Preventive environmental management.
Online Course Material
1. Dubey, B.K., Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science, NPTEL Course
Material, Department of Civil Engineering, IIT Kharagpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/127105018/
44
Title Hydrogen and Methanol Economy Number CH7XX0
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for MTECH, MTECH-PhD Dual Degree Type Elective
Prerequisite none
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production, storage, their
Utility and infrastructure development.
3. Impart knowledge about the economic and environmental view point of using Hydrogen and
Methanol as fuel sources.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. Proper knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production and related issues.
2. Economic view point of Hydrogen and Methanol as fuel and the related challenges &
opportunities.
Contents
Hydrogen and methanol as fuels: General aspects, Prelude to the energy systems, Hydrogen
and Methanol as energy sources, Future energy supply, Economy and Environment,
Sustainability (6 Lectures)
Hydrogen economy: Properties, production, storage, utilization and safely, Infrastructure
requirement, Hydrogen as a transportation fuel, Hydrogen based fuel cell. (12 Lectures)
Methanol economy: Properties, production, storage, transportation and safely, Infrastructure
Requirement, Methanol as fuel and energy carrier, Methanol as automobile, marine and
aviation fuel. (14 Lectures)
Challenges and opportunities: Indian and global perspectives, Domestic and transportation
application, Affordable Technology development, Policy. (6 Lectures)
Case studies: Comparative study with other energy sources. (4 Lectures)
Textbook
1. G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, G. K. S. Prakash,(2006), Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol
Economy, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany.
2. Ball M. and Wietschel M.,(2009) The Hydrogen Economy Opportunities and Challenges,
Cambridge University Press.
Reference Books
1. A. Scipioni, A. Manzardo, J. Ren, (2017) Hydrogen Economy: Supply Chain, Life Cycle
Analysis and Energy Transition for Sustainability, Academic Press.
2. M. Bertau, H. Offermanns, L. Plass, F. Schmidt, H. Wernicke,(2014) Methanol: The Basic
Chemical and Energy Feedstock of the Future, Springer; 2014
45
Title Selected Topics in Petroleum and
Petrochemicals
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for M.Tech. / M.Tech.- Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective
Prerequisite To be declared by the instructor
Objective
The instructor will provide:
1. In-depth coverage on specific topics in the area of Petroleum and Petrochemicals.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1. the in-depth knowledge in specific topic in the area of Petroleum and
Petrochemicals.
Contents
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor.
Textbook
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
Reference Books
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
Title Recent Advances in Petroleum and
Petrochemicals
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-0 (2)
Offered for M.Tech./ M.Tech.- Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective
Prerequisite To be declared by instructor
Objective
The instructor will provide:
1. Focussed and modular coverage on multiple topics of current interest in the area of
Petroleum and Petrochemicals. The topics to be covered will depend on the
instructor, but will relate to advanced research level material.
(To be taken by students specifically interested in the corresponding areas of
research.)
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have
1. the in-depth insight in the corresponding area of research and apply the knowledge
in the corresponding area of research.
Contents
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor.
Textbook
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
Reference Books
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
46
Title Current Topics in Petroleum and
Petrochemicals
Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 1-0-0 (1)
Offered for M.Tech. / M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective
Prerequisite To be declared by the instructor
Objective
The instructor will provide:
1.In-depth coverage on current topics in the area of Petroleum and Petrochemicals.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have:
1.the in-depth knowledge in specific topic in the field of Petroleum and Petrochemicals
and apply the knowledge to specific areas of research.
Contents
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor.
Textbook
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
Reference Books
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor.
47
Group 4: Additional program Electives
Title Advanced Fluid Dynamics Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE
Prerequisite An introductory course on Fluid Mechanics
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide knowledge about boundary layer theory, turbulent boundary layer, modelling of
turbulent flow, nonnewtonian fluid and fluidization phenomena.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain:
1. Understanding of boundary layer theory, turbulent boundary layer, modelling of turbulent
flow, nonnewtonian fluid, fluidization phenomena.
2. Understanding of design aspects of fluidization.
Contents
Momentum theorem: Equations of change, ideal flow, Eulers equations of motion, velocity
potential, rotational and irrotational flow; Navier-Stokes equation, poiseuille flow, creep flow
and Couette flow. [8 Lectures]
Boundary layer: Boundary layer theory, integral momentum analysis, turbulent boundary layer,
turbulence and mixing, universal velocity profile. [8 Lectures]
Stability analysis: Stability analysis of laminar flow, Orr-Sommerfield solution, transition to
turbulence, detailed modeling of turbulent flow. [8 Lectures]
Laminar and turbulent flow: Non-newtonian fluid, rheological characteristics, consistency
measurement, viscometric flow, pipe and annular flow, pipeline design equations. [8
Lectures]
Fluidization: The phenomena of fluidization and its industrial application, characteristics of
particles, principle of fluidization and mapping of various regimes, two phase theory of
fluidization, bubbles in fluidized bed, entrainment. fast fluidized bed. mixing, segregation
and gas dispersion. heat and mass transfer in fluidized bed, solid-liquid fluidized bed and
three phase fluidized bed, design of fluidized bed reactors. [10 Lectures]
Textbook
1. Kundu, P.K. and Cohen, I.M. (2016) Fluid Dynamics, Academic Press.
2. Muralidhar, K. and Biswas, G. (2005) Advanced Engineering Fluid Mechanics, Alpha Science
Reference Books
1. Deen, W.M., (2011) Analysis of Transport Phenomena, 2nd ed., Oxford.
2. Bird, R. B., Stewart, W. E. and Lightfoot, E. N., (2002) Transport Phenomena, 2nd ed, Wiley.
3. Kunni, B. and Levenspiel, O. (1991) Fluidization Engineering, Elsevier
Online Course Material
1. Advanced Fluid Mechanics, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105218/
48
Title Advanced Mass Transfer Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE
Prerequisite An introductory course on Mass Transfer
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about multi-component distillation, minimum reflux ratio,
total reflux, product distribution, flash vaporization, etc.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain:
1. Understanding of multi-component distillation, minimum reflux ratio, total reflux, product
distribution, flash vaporization, etc.
Contents
Multicomponent mass transfer: Multicomponent distillation, determination of key
components at minimum reflux ration by the method of Shiras. [8 Lectures]
Minimum reflux ratio by Underwoods method; Fenske equation for total reflux and
computation of product distribution; Flash vaporization of feed to the distillation column;
Rigorous methods of Lewis-Matheson, Thiele-Geddes, bubble point, sum rates method,
Naphthali-Sandholm method. [10 Lectures]
Absorption with chemical reaction. [8 Lectures]
Simulation of cascade processes. [8 Lectures]
Recent developments in mass transfer and separation processes. [8 Lectures]
Text Book
1. Ross Taylor, R. Krishna, (1993) Multicomponent Mass Transfer, John Wiley & Sons.
2. Seader, Henley and Ropar (2011) Separation Process Principles, 3rd Edition Wiley.
Reference Books
1. Humphrey, J. L. and Keller, G. E., (1997), Separation Process Technology, McGraw- Hill,
NY
2. Kister, H. Z., (1992), Distillation Design, McGraw-Hill.
Online Course Material
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103035/
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/104/103104046/
https://nptel.ac.in/content/syllabus_pdf/103103034.pdf
49
Title Advanced Heat Transfer Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE
Prerequisite An introductory course on Heat Transfer
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about steady and unsteady state conduction in one-, two-
and three-dimensional cases, forced convection, radiation heat transfer concepts, boiling
heat transfer, liquid metal heat transfer etc.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain:
1. Understanding of about steady and unsteady state conduction in one-, two- and three-
dimensional cases, forced convection, radiation heat transfer concepts, boiling heat
transfer, liquid metal heat transfer etc.
2. Design of compact heat exchangers.
Contents
Conduction: General equation of change of energy. Steady and unsteady state conduction in
one-, two- and three-dimensional cases. Finite difference method for steady and unsteady
conduction. [8 Lectures]
Forced convention heat transfer: Analytical and semi- analytical solutions. Equations for
velocity and temperature in vertical and horizontal planes for cylinders and spheres. [8
Lectures]
Radiation heat transfer: Concepts. Angle factor calculations. Network method of analysis for
radiation exchange. Radiation calculation through gases and vapors. [8 Lectures]
Design of compact heat exchangers. [4 Lectures]
Boiling heat transfer, liquid metal heat transfer. [8 Lectures]
Selected advanced topics on heat transfer. [6 Lectures]
Textbook
1. Ozisik, M.N., [2013], Boundary Value Problems of Heat Conduction, Dover Publications
2. Ghoshdastidar, P.S., [2012], Heat Transfer, Oxford Press.
Reference Books
3. Incropera, F. P. and Dewitt, D. P. [2006] Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer, Wiley
4. Muralidhar, K. and Sundarrajan, T. [2003] Computational Fluid flow and heat Transfer, Alpha
Science.
Online Course Material
2. Advanced Heat Transfer, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/105/103105052/
50
Title Capillarity and Wetting Number CH7LXX
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for As prescribed for 700 level course Type Elective
Prerequisite Basic course on Fluid dynamics
Objective
The Instructor will:
1. Provide the knowledge about fundamentals of capillarity and wetting phenomena and
help the students to understand many small scale phenomena occurring in nature.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand the basic concept of capillarity and wetting (Young Laplace law, Young
equation, lubrication equation, Stokes equation);
2. Understand and apply the physical principles of static and dynamic wetting;
Contents
Introduction, scope and applications (1 Lecture)
Fundamentals (Molecular) of interaction force and interfacial tensions (2 Lectures)
Derivation of the fundamental equations of Young and Laplace (3 Lectures)
Wetting and molecular forces (disjoining pressure) (4 Lectures)
Wetting in external fields (2 Lectures)
Thin film flows and lubrication (5 Lectures)
stability and Instability analysis (Rayleigh Plateau, Rayleigh Taylor) (8 Lectures)
Contact line dynamics (5 Lectures)
Dewetting phenomena (4 Lectures)
Surface tension-driven flows (4 Lectures)
Basics of electrowetting (4 Lectures)
Text Book
1. Pierre-Gilles de Gennes, Francoise Brochard-Wyart, David Quere, 2003, Capillarity and
Wetting Phenomena, Springer Science and Business Media, New York USA.
Reference Books
1. Pierre Lambert, 2013, Surface Tension in Microsystems: Engineering Below the
Capillary Length, Springer.
2. Dieter Langbein, 2002, Capillary Surfaces: Shape — Stability — Dynamics, in
Particular Under Weightlessness, Springer.
Online Course Material
1. Bhaskarwar A. N., Interfacial Engineering, NPTEL course material, Department of
Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Techonology Delhi,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103102016/
51
Title Principles of Electrochemical Engineering Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 (3)
Offered for B.Tech. Type Program
Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Thermodynamics
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide the student with the essential knowledge needed to understand electrochemical
engineering and technology.
2. Illustrate the basic principles of electrochemistry, electrokinetic phenomena required for
modelling and design of electrochemical processes and devices.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Understand the principles of electrochemistry processes and electro-analytical methods.
2. Correlate the principles of electrochemistry to electrochemical processes and suggest
design solutions to engineering problems.
Contents
Basic Principles: Introduction to electrochemistry and fundamentals, Nernst equation,
Electrode kinetics, Volta and Galvani potentials, electrochemical potential, electrochemical
equilibrium, Enthalpy and Gibbs free energy calculation, solvation energy, ionic
equilibrium. (6 lectures)
Cell potential: Electrochemical cell, standard electrode potential, Butler-Volmer formulation,
Tafel equation, Pourbaix diagram, Activity Coefficients, Donnan potential, reversible
electrode, Born model for ion-solvation energy, Batteries and Cell Chemistries. (7 lectures)
Ion-ion interactions and ionic transport: Debye-Huckel theory, activity coefficient of ionic
solution, ion pair, Bjerrum theory and Fuoss theory, migration, extended Nernst-Planck
equation, electrochemical mobility and its relation with diffusivity, Stokes-Einstein
equation, ionic conductivity, transport number, Kohlrausch law. (12 lectures)
Charged interface: surface excess quantity, Lippmann equation, Gouy-Chapman model, Stern
layer, internal and external Helmholtz layer, zeta potential, electric double layer. (8
lectures)
Electrochemical Kinetics: Nonequilibrium formulation, diffusion potential, junction potential,
Planck-Henderson equation, pH electrode, electro-osmosis, electrophoresis, streaming
potential, sedimentation potential. (7 lectures)
Application: Electro-chemical Processes, Fuel Cells. (2 lectures)
Textbook
1. Prentice ,G., 1991, Electrochemical Engineering Principles, Prentice Hall.
2. Girault, H., 2004, Analytical and Physical Electrochemistry, EPFL Press, 1st Edition.
Reference Books
1. Allen J. Bard, Larry R. Faulkner, 2005, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and
Applications, John Wiley & Sons; 2nd Edition.
2. Fuller,T.F., Harb, J. N., 2018, Electrochemical Engineering, Wiley.
Online Course Material
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106105/
52
Title Kinetics & Theory for Polymers Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type Program
Elective
Prerequisite An introductory knowledge of polymers
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide details on kinetics and theories relevant to polymer reactions as well as
crystallization.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to:
1. Gain knowledge about the variety of reaction mechanisms for polymerization and their
kinetics
2. Learn about the theories of polymer crystallization and it’s kinetics
Contents
Polymerization reactions and classification [3 lectures]
Kinetics of Step Polymerization: polymerization reactions, Carothers theory for linear step
polymerization, Statistical theory for linear step polymerization, Kinetics of step
polymerization, Carothers theory for gelation, Statistical theory for gelation, Validation of
theories [12 lectures]
Kinetics of Free Radical Polymerization: Reaction kinetics, polymerization processes, kinetics of
living and ATRP polymerization [9 lectures]
Kinetics of Ionic Polymerization: Kinetics of cationic polymerization, kinetics of anionic
polymeirzation [4 lectures]
Kinetics of Copolymerization: Reaction and kinetics [6 lectures]
Kinetics in Polymer Crystallization: Kinetics and mechanism, melting in semicrystalline polymers
[8 lectures]
Textbook
1. Young R.J. and Lovell P.A. (2011) Introduction to Polymers, 3rd Edition, CRC Press
Reference Books
1. Odian G., (2004) Principles of Polymerization, 4th Edition, Wiley Interscience
53
Title Catalytic Nanomaterials Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical Reaction
Engineering
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide knowledge about the nano-materials in catalysis applications
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to:
1. Gain knowledge about the advancements in catalytic materials and their applications
Contents
Introduction: Nano materials in catalysis, nanomaterials’ impact on catalysis, tailoring properties
of nanocatalysts,controlling active sites on nano materials, applications. [9 lectures]
Nano-catalyst based Technologies and Catalysis: Fuel Cell, exhaust catalysts, gas sensors,
photocatalysis. [10 lectures]
Nanocatalysis: catalysis by nanostructured metal particles, size-selective Fischer-Tropsch
nanocatalyst, nano-catalyst precursors, dendrimer based nanocatalysts, olefin
hydrogenation, nano-catalyst for heterogeneous catalysis. [14 lectures]
Synthesis of Nano-catalyst in Supercritical fluids: Properties of supercritical fluids, nanopowder
catalysts synthesis in SCFs, supported nano-catalysts in SCFs, supercritical microfluidics for
nano-catalyst synthesis. [9 lectures]
Textbook
1. Serp P., Philippot K., (2013) Nanomaterials in Catalysis, Wiley
54
Title Mechanics of Viscoelastic Materials Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3-0-0
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of polymers or viscoelastic
materials
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide detailed knowledge of viscoelasticity and it’s applications in various areas.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to:
Gain understanding of viscoelasticity, models for viscoelasticity and various viscoselastic
materials.
Get motivated to pursue further studies and research in the area of visco-elasticity.
Contents
Viscoelasticity: Introduction, creep and relaxation, anelastic materials, examples, Mechanical
models, Boltzmann superposition principle, dynamic mechanical testing, transitions and
polymer structure, entanglements [6 lectures]
Constitutive Relations: Predicting response of linear viscoelastic materials, fading memory,
relation between creep and relaxation and corresponding functions, time-temperature
superposition, 3D linear constitutional equation, dielectric relaxation, adaptive and smart
materials, non-linear viscoelasticity [10 lectures]
Dynamic Behavior of Linear Solids: Internal friction, linear dynamic response function, Kramers
Kronig relation, hysterisis, lumped and distributed systems, wave propogation and
attenuation, non-linear materials [8 lectures]
Linear Viscoelasticity and Viscoelastic Materials: Concepts, spectra, interrelations among spectra,
theory of viscoelasticity, relaxation in amorphous and crystalline polymers, aging, piezo
electric polymers, metals, ceramics, biological materials [20 lectures]
Textbook
1. Lakes R.S., (2009) Viscoelastic Materials, Cambridge University Press
Online Course Material
1. Deshpande, A., Rheology of Complex Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Chemical
Engineering, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/106/103106131/
55
Title Structure & Property for Polymers Number CHL7XX0
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE
Prerequisite An introductory course on polymers for BTech,
None for MTech
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide knowledge about various structures in polymers and it’s relation with the mechanical
and thermal properties
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to gain:
1. Understanding of structure-property for various polymeric systems
2. Understanding of thermal transition and deformation mechanisms in polymers
Contents
Introduction: Outline of the course, review of basics of polymers, polymerization reactions and
classification [2 lectures]
Amorphous and Semicrystalline Polymers: Glass transition, free-volume theory, factors affecting
glass transition temperature, solution grown single crystals and chain-folding mechanism,
melt crystallization, spherulites, degree of crystallinity, Bragg’s law, crystal thickness and
chain extension, flow-induced crystallization, dimensionless numbers in crystallization,
factors affecting melting, relationship between melting and glass transition [11 lectures]
Multicomponent Polymeric Systems: Polymer blends, block copolymers, thermoplastic
elastomers, examples, phase diagram, glass transition, compatibilization, morphology
diagram [6 lectures]
Deformation in Polymers: Elastic deformation, stress-strain relationship, polymer chain
deformation, crystal moduli, elastic deformation in semicrystalline polymers, yield and
crazing – necking and its mathematical treatment, yield criteria, mechanisms, plastic
deformation [9 lectures]
Viscoelasticity: Introduction, examples, Mechanical models, Boltzmann superposition principle,
dynamic mechanical testing, transitions and polymer structure, t-T superposition,
entanglements [9 lectures]
Polymer Composites: Matrix and fillers, composition, elastic deformation, fracture, packing,
experiments, nanocomposites [5 lectures]
Textbook
1. Young R.J. and Lovell P.A. (2011) Introduction to Polymers, 3rd Edition, CRC Press
Reference Books
1. Chanda M. (2006) Introduction to Polymer Science & Chemistry, CRC Press
Online Course Material
1. Adhikari B, Science & Technology of Polymers, NPTEL Course Material, Department of
Metallurgy & Material Science, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028/