
BS Chemistry@IITJ	
HomeProgramQ&A	
B.S. in Chemistry with Specialization
An Engineering linked Undergraduate Program
A Tour of our  program


This undergraduate program has been designed to transmit fundamental knowledge in basic science and engineering during the first few semesters, which develops critical analytical thinking and forms the basis of diverse skill sets used by scientists and engineers to innovate, design, and develop technologies for the future. Students undergo comprehensive training in advanced concepts of chemistry for the next two years. The inclusion of a substantial component of courses from other science and engineering departments makes the program quite interdisciplinary in nature. The final year of the curriculum is designed towards specialization in a focused area. The flexibility of opting for different specializations is ingrained in formulating the structure and curriculum of the programme. During these years, the students get to experience the joys and rigors of original research currently being pursued and consider a variety of career paths through capability-linked specializations of their choice. In the specialization, emphasis is given to the emerging areas in Chemistry to meet societal and industrial needs, and ever-growing sustainability demands. The graduating students of this program shall be equipped with requisite skill-sets required to assume leadership positions in the different sectors of industry, further their career in higher studies, or embark on entrepreneurial ventures to address present day unmet challenges of the country.


We Offer


 Objectives

To equip new generation aspiring minds with engineering linked chemical science skill sets enabling them to opt for challenging career paths at various levels of academia and industry

To impart education towards understanding of the concepts of chemical science, basic engineering, and allied areas enabling the students to tackle societal problems through an interdisciplinary approach

To integrate analytical and computational abilities with experimental skills to create individuals competent in professional science practices

To facilitate and promote entry into research at an early stage through a flexible and border less curriculum

To inculcate an attitude towards commitment to scientific ethics, leadership qualities, entrepreneurship, and professional development for the future generation

To instill the approach of collaborative research between academia and industry targeting sustainability.



Opportunities
P. C. Ray Fellowship of Rs. 50,000 for every semester if a student continues to maintain CGPA 8.0 every semester.
Fully paid international conference/internship of two months duration during summer term.
Learning Outcomes
Acquire strong fundamentals in theoretical and practical aspects of organic, inorganic and physical chemistry as well as other branches of basic science and engineering. 

Apply the concepts of science and basic engineering to analyze and design complex novel materials, and molecular complexes having potential applications to society.

Develop skills on hands-on wet chemistry, analytical, instrumentation, and experimental data handling to tackle scientific problems.

Perform literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research.

Develop communication skills by participating in classroom presentations, seminars and workshops on manuscript / patent writing / presentation skills.

Value of team work and group discussion in problem solving, and time management to continue co-curricular activities without compromising academics.

To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities.

Graduate Attributes
Strong understanding of fundamentals of science and engineering with emphasis on chemical science.

A strong foundation in the analytical, experimental, and computational methods to study various aspects of chemical science.

Foundations for critical thinking that are needed to broaden their careers in diverse cross-disciplines.

Ability to acquire new knowledge, integrate in the existing paradigm, and innovate solutions as per the requirement. 

Capability to appreciate synthetic methods for the development of important chemical products such as pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, paints, petrochemicals, food additives, plastics, etc. 

Ability to handle analytical, spectroscopic, microscopic and other instrumentation methods for interdisciplinary research areas. 

Use of computational tools to understand and analyse chemical and biophysical processes, molecular structures and advanced materials.

Ability to comprehend, write, and present scientific articles and technical reports.

Ability to engage in ethical and responsible practices while pursuing professional growth.

Specializations

Spectroscopy and Analytical Methods

Computational Chemistry

Catalysis and Synthesis

Entrepreneurship
Follow Us
TwitterLinkedInYouTube
Contact Us: office_chemistry@iitj.ac.in
