IIT Jodhpur Home Page
    A+  A  A-    


   हिन्दी  |  Sitemap
Home
People
Recruitment
Research
Academic Programs
Laboratories
Contact
IIT Jodhpur
Bioscience & Bioengineering
 Welcome image in BB

Previous
Nextpause
Welcome to the Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering
The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur, established in 2009 offers a B.Tech. program in Bioengineering, an M.Tech. and M.Tech-Ph.D. dual degree programs in Bioscience & Bioengineering. Our programs are uniquely designed to inspire innovations in biotechnology, engineering, and medicine from an understanding of  biological systems.  This capacity building is assuming importance in the present times for providing solutions to societal problems in trans-disciplinary frameworks. A major focus is on neurosciences and neurodegenerative disorders, mechanistic biology, environmental and medical microbiology, computational biology, precision health, and bioprospecting for novel molecules and bio-actives from natural resources of the Thar ecoregion. We also offer a competitive Ph.D. program to inculcate scientific temper, independent thinking, and skillsets for scientific entrepreneurship. We encourage and provide avenues for the participation of bioengineering graduates with diverse engineering disciplines to develop technologies for:

Affordable and Smart Healthcare
Clean Environment
Precision Medicine and Health
Sustainable and Affordable Energy
Faculties at the department with wide-ranging expertise,  conduct fundamental and translational research in focus areas that are contemporary and aligned to major sustainable development goals. We are passionate about research and actively communicate our science through regular outreach programs.

outreach programs





Message from the Head of the Department

Message from the Head of Bioscience and Bioengineering
Assoc. Prof. Neha Jain (Acting Head BSBE)
Email: head_bb@iitj.ac.in, Phone: 0291 280 1201
Bioscience and Bioengineering are pivotal to India's growth. driving innovation and advancing technology in healthcare. Agriculture and environmental sustainability. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur plays a key role in implementing diverse advanced biological research areas within these fields. with a strong focus on fostering research and development (R&D) and entrepreneurship.

By offering a multidisciplinary platform that integrates cutting-edge research in drug discovery, genomics, and affordable and integrative precision healthcare solutions. Big Data Biology and bioinformatics. In addition. The department actively promotes entrepreneurship by providing incubation support, facilitating industry collaborations, and encouraging the growth of startup ventures in biosciences.

With access to advanced research facilities and guidance from expert faculty members, students can transform their ideas into practical, marketable solutions, benefiting industries such as healthcare, agriculture, and biomanufacturing.

BSBE Department, IIT Jodhpur, emphasizes interdisciplinary research in the near future, which may also align with national initiatives like the BioE3 policy to promote R&D, commercialization, and the establishment of bioeconomy hubs. The curriculum is thoughtfully designed to meet the diverse aspirations of students entering the fields of biosciences and bioengineering. This approach not only strengthens the academic peers ecosystem but also creates employment opportunities and enhances societal well-being.

Highlights
View all highlights
Announcement
View all announcement
Events
View all events
Important links
CCCD @ IITJ
Recruitment
Correspondence
RTI
Tenders
Techscape
Contact
Old Website
NCCR Portal
How To Reach IITJ
Institute Repository
Donations
Web Policy
Web Information Manager
Feedback
CERT-IN
Help
NIRF
Internal Committee
Intranet Links
IIT Jodhpur Facebook Page
IIT Jodhpur Twitter Page
IIT Jodhpur You tube Channel
IIT Jodhpur Instagram Page
IIT Jodhpur Linkedin Page
G20 India 2023
75 Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)
Vidya Lakshmi Fulfilling Educational Aspirations
National Commission for Women (NCW) Helpline
National Anti-Ragging Monitoring Agency
india.gov.in National portal of India
Copyright © 2025 All Rights Reserved | This Portal is Owned, Designed, and Developed by Digital Infrastructure & Automation, IIT Jodhpur.  N.H. 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar, Jodhpur - 342030, Rajasthan (India)
For any comments/enquiries/feedback, please email the WIM.
Last Updated : 10 Mar 2026 - 05:27 PM
arrow_downward️