IIT Jodhpur Home Page
    A+  A  A-    


   हिन्दी  |  Sitemap
Home
People
Recruitment
Research
Academic Programs
Events
Laboratories
Facilities
Contact
IIT Jodhpur
Chemistry
Home
Academic Programs
Post Graduate Program
Post Graduate Program

Introduction

The Department of Chemistry hosts a two-year M.Sc. Chemistry   (Download file 1033 KB) Program in Chemistry. The primary objective of M.Sc. Chemistry program at IIT Jodhpur is to bring out professionals with the fundamental knowledge and skill sets of various aspects of Chemistry. The program comprises a strong collection of courses spanning among organic, inorganic, physical, and theoretical chemistry with associated laboratory and hands-on sessions to provide practical knowledge. As part of the M.Sc. program, students carry out one major and one minor research project under the guidance of the faculty members of the department to get an exposure to the modern research going on in various subdomains of chemistry.

Post-Graduate-Program



Objective of the Programme

The major objective of the program is to bring out professionals having fundamental knowledge, and specific skill sets of various aspects of chemistry such as Organic Reactions and their Mechanism, Main-Group and Transition Metals, Organometallics and Catalysis, Physical and Spectroscopic techniques, Inorganic and Solid State Material synthesis, Computational and Theoretical Chemistry. The department focuses on preparing future students to take up challenges at various levels of academics, R&Ds and industries.

Expected Graduate Attributes

Capability to appreciate synthetic methods for development of important chemical products such as pharmaceutical drugs, paints, petrochemicals, food additives, plastics etc
Ability to use characterization tools for analysing reactions and monitoring chemical processes for product development
Ability to handle analytical, spectroscopic, microscopic and other instrumental methods for interdisciplinary research areas
Use of computational tools to understand and analyse chemical and biophysical processes, molecular structures and advanced materials
Ability to comprehend, write and present scientific articles and technical reports
Develop oral and written communication skills
Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics and sense of intellectual integrity
Ability to plan and manage technical research projects and work in a team


Learning Outcomes

Strong fundamentals in theoretical and practical aspects of organic, inorganic and physical chemistry
Develop appreciation of hands-on wet chemistry, analytical, instrumentation, and experimental data handling skills to solve scientific problems to address technological challenges in various domains
Knowledge of computational and theoretical chemistry
Skills for material synthesis and processes for device integration
Develop the ability to exercise independent learning, thinking and problem solving skills
Develop the ability to interact in a cross-cultural environment and acquire time and project management skills for carrying out guided research work in any of the research areas related to science and technology
Develop skills to communicate scientific learning and present ideas
 

Duration: 2 years 

Proposed Intake: 38 (including EWS)

Eligibility: JAM (Chemistry) qualified candidates will be considered as per the existing norms of M.Sc. programs.  

Faculty Coordinator: Prof. Ananya Debnath (Email: ananya@iitj.ac.in)

Important links
CCCD @ IITJ
Recruitment
Correspondence
RTI
Tenders
Techscape
Contact
Old Website
NCCR Portal
How To Reach IITJ
Institute Repository
Donations
Web Policy
Web Information Manager
Feedback
CERT-IN
Help
NIRF
Internal Committee
Intranet Links
IIT Jodhpur Facebook Page
IIT Jodhpur Twitter Page
IIT Jodhpur You tube Channel
IIT Jodhpur Instagram Page
IIT Jodhpur Linkedin Page
G20 India 2023
75 Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)
Vidya Lakshmi Fulfilling Educational Aspirations
National Commission for Women (NCW) Helpline
National Anti-Ragging Monitoring Agency
india.gov.in National portal of India
Copyright © 2025 All Rights Reserved | This Portal is Owned, Designed, and Developed by Digital Infrastructure & Automation, IIT Jodhpur.  N.H. 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar, Jodhpur - 342030, Rajasthan (India)
For any comments/enquiries/feedback, please email the WIM.
Last Updated : 12 Mar 2026 - 03:42 PM
arrow_downward