IIT Jodhpur Home Page
    A+  A  A-    


   हिन्दी  |  Sitemap
Home
People
Recruitment
Research
Academic Programs
Events
Laboratories
Facilities
Contact
IIT Jodhpur
Chemistry
 Welcome image in chemistry PhD admission with key Research Area

Previous
Nextpause
Welcome to Department of Chemistry & Head's Message
A warm welcome to the Department of Chemistry at IIT Jodhpur, which was established in 2015. Since the inception, the department has taken major strides forward in teaching, research and technology development. Our department offers a variety of academic programs including M.Sc. (2 Years), M.Sc. (Chemistry)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) with Specialization, BS in Chemistry with Specialization (4 years), and Ph.D. programs. We also provide core and elective courses in chemistry and related fields for undergraduate B.Tech. engineering students. The department offers Chemistry courses for 4-year Integrated B.Sc.-B.Ed. Program (ITEP), which is in alignment with NEP 2020 to support teacher preparation and foster professional development.

Besides teaching, the Department is striving to be acknowledged for excellence in research and technology. Our goal is to foster an environment where everyone can thrive, reach their full potential, and contribute to cutting-edge scientific advancements. We have the latest state of the art basic teaching laboratories and several thematic research laboratories. Our current faculty strength is 19 and they are carrying out research activities in all major areas of chemical sciences, namely, organic synthesis and catalysis, chemical biology, main group chemistry and organometallics, nanomaterials, spectroscopy and chemical dynamics, biophysical chemistry and computational chemistry. The cutting-edge research in the thrust areas by our faculty members are published in international peer-reviewed journals of well-repute. In short IIT Jodhpur Chemistry department is where Chemistry meets Technology through Collaboration, Communication and Cooperation. I encourage the future aspirants to get enrolled at IIT Jodhpur and wish you all the very best in your future endeavours. Thank you.

The thrust areas in which research is being actively carried are given below.

The thrust areas in which research is being actively carried 	


Quick Links
Ph.D Admission January 2026 Apply Now
Course Type For Online Registration Of M.Sc. Program   (470 KB)
LHB Booking
CDIF Equipment Booking
Department Seminar Hall Booking
External users: sample analysis services   (9.8 MB)
Latest News
View all news
Highlights
View all highlights
Latest Events
View all events
Important links
CCCD @ IITJ
Recruitment
Correspondence
RTI
Tenders
Techscape
Contact
Old Website
NCCR Portal
How To Reach IITJ
Institute Repository
Donations
Web Policy
Web Information Manager
Feedback
CERT-IN
Help
NIRF
Internal Committee
Intranet Links
IIT Jodhpur Facebook Page
IIT Jodhpur Twitter Page
IIT Jodhpur You tube Channel
IIT Jodhpur Instagram Page
IIT Jodhpur Linkedin Page
G20 India 2023
75 Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)
Vidya Lakshmi Fulfilling Educational Aspirations
National Commission for Women (NCW) Helpline
National Anti-Ragging Monitoring Agency
india.gov.in National portal of India
Copyright © 2025 All Rights Reserved | This Portal is Owned, Designed, and Developed by Digital Infrastructure & Automation, IIT Jodhpur.  N.H. 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar, Jodhpur - 342030, Rajasthan (India)
For any comments/enquiries/feedback, please email the WIM.
Last Updated : 12 Mar 2026 - 03:42 PM
arrow_downward️